  Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Couples across Countries:
                   A Macroeconomic Analysis
                        Alexander Bick                              Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
                     Arizona State University              Goethe University Frankfurt, CFS and CEPR ⇤

                                                       August 22, 2017



                                                             Abstract


           We document contemporaneous differences in the aggregate labor supply of married couples across
       17 European countries and the US. Based on a model of joint household decision making, we quantify
       the contribution of international differences in non-linear labor income taxes and consumption taxes to
       the international differences in hours worked in the data. Through the lens of the model, taxes, together
       with wages and the educational composition, account for a significant part of the small differences in
       married men’s and the large differences in married women’s hours worked in the data. Taking the full
       non-linearities of labor income tax codes, including the tax treatment of married couples, into account
       is crucial for generating the low cross-country correlation between married men’s and women’s hours
       worked in the data, and for explaining the variation of married women’s hours worked across European
       countries.
       Keywords: Taxation, Two-Earner Households, Hours Worked

       JEL classification: E60, H20, H31, J12, J22




   ⇤ Email: alexander.bick@asu.edu and fuchs@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de.        We thank Domenico Ferraro, Berthold Herrendorf, Paul
Klein, Dirk Krueger, José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, Richard Rogerson, Kjetil Storesletten, the editor and four anonymous referees, as well
as numerous seminar and conference participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Bettina Brüggemann and Hannah Paule-
Paludkiewicz provided truly outstanding research assistance with the data, and Enida Bajgoric, Pavlin Tomov, and Desiree Winges
with the tax codes. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Cluster of Excellence “Formation of Normative
Orders” at Goethe University and the European Research Council under Starting Grant No. 262116. Alexander Bick further thanks
the Research Department of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for the hospitality, and the Fritz Thyssen Foundation for the
financial support of that stay. All errors are ours.
1    Introduction
A large literature has documented and analyzed differences in aggregate hours worked across countries (see
Prescott (2004) and Alesina et al. (2005) for two early contributions). In this paper, we document a striking
fact on the disaggregate level, namely that the cross-country correlation of average hours worked of married
men and married women aged 25 to 54 is essentially zero.1 Explaining the large differences in the labor
supply behavior of married men and married women with linear (average marginal) taxes – a prominent and
successful predictor in explaining aggregate hours worked differences in the literature pioneered by Prescott
(2004) – or with institutions, as stressed by Alesina et al. (2005), seems challenging. E.g., higher (lower)
average taxes should induce both married men and women in a country to work fewer (more) hours, which
is not consistent with the data. In this paper, we show that a standard model of household labor supply
together with a richer view of cross-country differences in tax systems, specifically in the tax treatment of
married couples, can account both for the pattern of differences between married men and women, as well
as for much of the aggregate differences in hours worked of married couples.
    Our quantitative analysis builds on the model of joint labor supply of married couples developed in
Kaygusuz (2010) and Guner et al. (2012a, 2012b). As typical for cross-country studies in macroeconomics,
we calibrate the model to match the labor supply behavior in a benchmark country, namely the US. We then
predict labor supply behavior in 17 European countries, holding preferences fixed but using the country-
specific economic environment. The latter comprises non-linear labor income taxes and consumption taxes,
as well as gender and educational wage premia, and the educational distribution plus the degree of assortative
matching into couples. For the non-linear labor income taxes, we implement the country-specific statutory
labor income tax codes in detail, specifically also the tax treatment of married couples.
    The calibrated model replicates the international differences in married couple’s labor supply fairly well.
It accounts for 58% of the US-Europe gap in hours worked for married men, and for 88% of the larger gap
for married women. The cross-country correlation between hours worked in the model and the data, which
is informative about the predictive power for the variation of hours within Europe, is 0.43 for both men and
women. Most importantly, the predicted correlation of hours worked of married men and married women
in the model is with 0.33 fairly low. While both international differences in average linear tax rates and
consumption tax rates predict a perfect correlation of hours worked of married men and married women,
international differences in the tax system predict a much lower correlation of only 0.32.
    The key to the success of the model in breaking the correlation between married men’s and women’s
labor supply, and in explaining the within-Europe variation in married women’s hours worked, is thus the
explicit modeling of non-linearities in the labor income tax codes. These non-linearities comprise both the
tax treatment of married couples and the progressivity of the tax system. The tax treatment of married
couples across countries ranges from separate to different degrees of joint taxation. In a system of separate
   1 By contrast, countries in which hours worked by married men are low, are also countries in which hours worked by singles are

low, independent of the gender: the cross-country correlation between hours worked of married men and single men [women] is
0.79 [0.64].


                                                               1
taxation, each spouse’s marginal tax rate increases only in the own income, i.e. each spouse is taxed like a
single individual is taxed. In contrast, in systems of joint taxation one spouse’s marginal tax rate increases
not only in the own income, but also in the spousal income. To understand the workings of joint taxation,
consider the case of Germany. The incomes of husband and wife are summed up and divided by two,
and the tax burden on this hypothetical income is calculated using the tax function of singles. The total
household tax burden is then twice this amount. Due to the progressivity of the German tax code, this
implies that the secondary income earner (whose contribution to the household income is less than half,
i.e. typically the wife) faces a higher marginal tax rate than under separate taxation, while the opposite
is true for the primary earner (typically the husband).2 Hence, holding everything else constant, moving
from joint to separate taxation changes the incentives to work for the higher and lower earning spouse in
opposite directions. As a consequence, the cross-country variation in the tax treatment of married couples
counteracts the perfectly positive correlation between married men’s and women’s hours worked implied by
the cross-country differences in average tax rates.
    The key importance of the tax treatment of married couples can best be illustrated with a concrete
example. Take the cases of the US, a country with low average tax rates and joint taxation, Germany, a
country with high average tax rates and joint taxation, and Sweden, a country with high average tax rates
but with separate taxation. Figure 1 shows in the left panel the average labor income tax rate of a household
in which the wife does not work, plotted against the hours worked by the husband. This average labor
income tax rate is slightly larger in Sweden than in Germany, and substantially lower in the US. Evaluated
at the mean hours of US married men (indicated by a vertical line at 1970 hours) it amounts to 21.4% in the
US, compared to 33.4% in Germany, and 33.5% in Sweden. The right panel shows the average marginal
tax rate that a wife faces if she goes from not working to working a specific number of hours, varied on
the horizontal axis, keeping the husband’s hours fixed at 1970 hours. This average marginal tax rate is
substantially higher in Germany, but similar in Sweden and the US. At the average hours of US married
women, indicated with a vertical line at 1235 hours, it amounts to 29.1% and 28.0% in the US and Sweden,
respectively, but is drastically higher in Germany at 49.6%. Comparing the left and the right tax schedule,
one can see that tax rates are slightly lower for secondary income earners in Sweden, a country with separate
taxation, but substantially higher for secondary income earners than for primary income earners in the US
and Germany, countries with joint taxation of married couples. In the data, married men in Germany and
Sweden work roughly the same hours, around 15% fewer hours than in the US. Married women in Sweden,
    2 Under the German system of joint taxation, the overall tax burden of the household is always at most as large as under separate

taxation, i.e. there generally exists a marriage bonus. While the US system works differently, it also features joint taxation, i.e.
the marginal tax rate of one spouse is increasing in the income of the other spouse. In the US, the incomes of both spouses are
summed up, and the income thresholds defining each tax bracket are multiples of the thresholds for singles. In 2008, e.g., these
thresholds are multiplied by two only for the two lower tax brackets, and by 1.67, 1.22, and 1 for the three subsequent thresholds.
Since higher tax brackets feature higher marginal income tax rates, married households in the US may face a marriage bonus or a
marriage penalty. For 2008, the lowest level of household income from which onwards a marriage penalty can occur is $131,450
(which is slightly above the 90th percentile of household income in the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances, see Dı́az-Giménez
et al., 2011). This happens however only when both spouses’ earnings are identical. For households with only one earner there is
always a marriage bonus. For households with a household income above $131,450 and unequal earnings across spouses, the level
from which onwards a marriage penalty occurs is increasing in the ratio of earnings of the primary to the secondary earner.

                                                                 2
                              Figure 1: Labor Income Tax Codes in the US, Germany, and Sweden


  (a) Avg. Income Tax Rate if Only the Husband Works                                  (b) Avg. Marginal Income Tax Rate on Wives’ Earnings
     60




                                                                                         60
     50




                                                                                         50
     40




                                                                                         40
   30




                                                                                       30
   %




                                                                                       %
     20




                                                                                         20
     10




                                                                                         10
     0




                                                                                         0
          500   750   1000    1250   1500 1750 2000   2250   2500   2750   3000               500   750   1000    1250   1500 1750 2000    2250   2500   2750   3000
                                       Annual Hours                                                                         Annual Hours

                             US           Germany            Sweden                                              US           Germany             Sweden

Note: The tax rates are calculated assuming that husband and wife earn the country-specific mean wages of married men and
married women. Note that in each country the female wage is lower than the male wage. Hours worked of wives are fixed at 0 in
the left panel, and hours worked of husbands are fixed at 1970 in the right panel. The average marginal tax rate in the right panel
is calculated as the additional tax payments of the household divided by the wife’s earnings if the wife goes from working 0 hours
to working the respective hours on the x-axis. Vertical dashed lines represent mean hours worked per married man (left panel) and
married woman (right panel) in the US.


in turn, work only slightly fewer hours than US married women (4%), while German married women work
34% fewer hours. The model generates this variation because it features both differences in the average tax
rate and in the tax structure, with the latter reflecting the progressivity of the tax code as well as the tax
treatment of couples.
    This logic carries over to the full sample of countries. The non-linearities in the labor income tax
codes generate variation in married women’s labor supply within Europe that is in line with the data, and
further predict on average lower hours in Europe than in the US for married men. However, since the US
features a system of joint taxation, while many European countries tend more towards separate taxation
systems, the tax treatment also reduces work incentives for married women in the US. Hence, imposing
the European labor income tax code on US married women does not always predict lower hours worked,
despite higher average labor income tax rates in Europe. By contrast, the on average 14 percentage points
higher consumption tax rates in Europe unambiguously predict lower hours in Europe. Thus, to explain the
on average higher hours worked of US than European married women, differences in consumption taxes are
crucial. However, they do not help explaining the variation of married women’s hours worked within Europe.
For married men, the effects of the tax structure (i.e. the combination of the tax treatment of couples and
progressivity of the tax code) go in the same direction as the effects of the average tax rate, both predicting
lower hours in Europe than in the US. Furthermore, high shares of low educated individuals, who exhibit the
lowest hours worked in each country, and high educational wage premia in Southern Europe help explain
low female hours worked there.


                                                                                  3
     This paper is organized as follows: The next section relates our paper to the literature. Section 3 shortly
discusses our data and sample selection criteria, and then shows some facts on the labor supply of married
couples in the US and 17 European countries. Section 4 introduces the model, as well as its parametrization
and calibration. Section 5 presents the results, and investigates the relative role of the various model inputs,
specifically of the non-linear labor income tax schedule. Section 6 then turns the attention to the two margins
of labor supply for married women. The last section concludes.


2     Related Literature
A series of papers (Prescott, 2004; Rogerson, 2006, 2008, 2009; Ohanian et al., 2008) have shown that
differences in consumption and average income tax rates, combined into one linear tax rate on income, can
largely explain differences in the time series of aggregate hours worked across European countries and the
US after World War II, with the exception of Scandinavia. These papers abstract from modeling gender.
We distinguish explicitly between consumption and labor income taxes, and show that it is crucial to take
the full non-linearity of labor income tax schedules into account to explain hours worked by married men
and women. Two features that we abstract from in our analysis are capital income taxes and retirement
incentives through social security programs. McDaniel (2011) shows in a dynamic model that labor income
and consumption taxes are much more important than capital income taxes and productivity growth in
explaining the different developments of total hours over time across countries. Moreover, Wallenius (2013)
finds that differences in retirement systems have almost no effect on labor supply behavior before retirement,
i.e. in the age group we focus on, although they play a crucial role in explaining the large international
differences in the timing of retirement (see also Erosa et al., 2012; and Alonso-Ortiz, 2014).3 Guvenen et al.
(2014) investigate the role of cross-country differences of non-linear labor income tax codes for singles in
driving post- and pre-tax inequality. They show that differences in progressivity can explain a sizable part
of the differences in the US-Europe hours gap for men, but do not investigate female hours worked.
     High hours worked in Scandinavia despite high consumption and labor income taxes there have been
raised as a puzzle in the literature. Ragan (2013), and in a similar fashion Ngai and Pissarides (2011), suggest
government subsidies in sectors that serve as substitutes to home production, especially child care, as the
main explanation for this apparent puzzle, a point that had already been raised theoretically by Rogerson
(2007). They therefore explicitly model home production in addition to market work, and analyze the
effects of international differences in government subsidies.4 By contrast, we can replicate Scandinavian
hours well by taking the non-linearity of the labor income tax code into account.5 Our approach thus offers
    3 By starting at the age 25, we also abstract from international differences in educational systems and youth unemployment rates.
    4 Duernecker and Herrendorf (2016) also show the importance of home production in explaining international aggregate hours

worked differences, but focus on differential productivity improvements in the home production sector, rather than government
subsidies. Bridgman et al. (2017) report hours of home production for a large set of countries.
    5 Even for the Scandinavian country for which we obtain the worst fit, namely Denmark, our prediction for hours worked by

married couples is off by only 12%, whereas the corresponding number in Ragan (2013) is 51% in her benchmark calibration, and
41% in the specification with government subsidies. Note, however, that our data and predictions refer to married men and women
in the core age group, while Ragan’s sample comprises all men and women aged 15 to 64. We cannot directly compare our results

                                                                  4
a complementary explanation to Ragan (2013) and Ngai and Pissarides (2011) for high hours worked by
Scandinavian married women.
    The paper most closely related to ours is Chakraborty et al. (2015). They build a comprehensive life-
cycle model with idiosyncratic income risk to investigate the cross-country variation in hours worked of
married and single men and women. Besides non-linear labor income taxes, they concentrate on exogenous
marriage and divorce probabilities as driving forces of labor supply differences, while we in contrast also
include cross-country differences in consumption taxes, the educational composition, and matching into
couples. Chakraborty et al. (2015) find that for men labor income taxes contribute significantly to explaining
both the level difference of hours worked between Europe and the US as well as the within Europe variation
in hours worked, but not for women. Since they do not report the model predictions separately by marital
status, it is hard to directly compare our findings to theirs. With that caveat in mind, our results are broadly
similar to theirs, except for our finding that labor income taxes help explaining the variation of married
women’s hours worked within Europe. We show in a decomposition exercise – in which we decompose
the labor income tax code into the average labor income tax rate and the tax structure – that for generating
variation in line with the data for married women’s hours worked it is crucial to take the full non-linearities
of the labor income tax codes into account. These non-linearities are also the driving force that breaks the
correlation of hours worked of married men and women, which is a feature of the data that Chakraborty et al.
(2015) do not focus on. They approximate the non-linearities via weighted averages of two tax polynomials
assuming fully separate or fully joint taxation, while we essentially implement the exact statutory labor
income tax code. Summarizing, the rich life-cycle model by Chakraborty et al. (2015) allows them to
investigate the role of marriage and divorce probabilities for female and male labor supply, while our static
model and our focus on married couples allow us to analyze in greater detail the role of the non-linearities
of the labor income tax codes.
    Besides the literature on international labor supply differences, our paper connects to the large literature
documenting the increase in labor supply of married women in the US over the last decades. Albanesi
and Olivetti (2009), Jones et al. (2014), and Olivetti (2006) trace part of this increase back to changes in the
gender wage gap and the return to experience for women. We therefore incorporate cross-country differences
in gender and educational wage gaps, as well as the educational composition, into our analysis.6 Attanasio
et al. (2008) point to the important role of the decline in child care costs. In Section 6, we do not find
supporting evidence that international differences in child care costs are related to labor supply differences
of married women, with the caveat that it is difficult to obtain appropriate and comparable measures of
individual child care costs across countries. Further important driving factors of the increase in the labor
supply of US married women analyzed in the literature are technological improvements in the household
sector (Greenwood et al., 2005), improvements in maternal health and the introduction of infant formula
(Albanesi and Olivetti, 2015), and structural change (Buera et al., 2014; Ngai and Petrongolo, 2017; and
to Ngai and Pissarides (2011), as they do not predict total hours, but only relative shares in different sectors.
    6 Knowles (2013) shows further implications of changes in the gender wage gap through changes in the bargaining power within

the household, a feature we omit in our unitary household model.

                                                               5
Rendall, 2015).
      Within this literature, Rendall (2015) analyzes the effect of taxation on the increase in female labor
supply in the US over time, and links both phenomena to structural change by focusing on the size of the
service sector. Crossley and Jeon (2007) study in a difference-in-differences approach a Canadian tax reform
in 1988 which reduced the “jointness” of the labor income tax system, while Eissa (1995, 1996) analyzes
in a similar approach the effects of significant decreases in the top marginal income tax rate in the US in
the 1980s. These three studies conclude that the relevant tax reforms increased the labor supply of wives of
high-earning husbands significantly. Kaygusuz (2010) analyzes the effects of the same US tax reforms on
the labor supply of married women with a quantitative model. Bar and Leukhina (2009) carry out a similar
analysis including a wider range of tax reforms. Guner et al. (2012a, 2012b) evaluate counterfactual policy
reforms in an elaborate quantitative life-cycle model. They find that going from joint to individual taxation
would increase the labor supply of married women in the US substantially. Building on the framework that
we develop in this paper, we analyze a similar counterfactual tax reform in European countries in addition
to the US in Bick and Fuchs-Schündeln (2017).


3      Hours Worked of Married Couples

3.1     Data and Sample Selection
We use three different micro data sets, namely the European Labor Force Survey (ELFS), the Current Pop-
ulation Survey (CPS) from the US, and the German Microcensus, to construct internationally comparable
hours worked for married men and women aged 25 to 54. The main challenge lies in the variation in refer-
ence weeks in the surveys across countries and within countries over time, which we overcome by adjusting
for vacation weeks from external data sources. A detailed description of the data work can be found in Bick
et al. (2017).
      We include only married individuals into the sample. There are a few countries which differentiate
between marriage and a civil union. In this case, the ELFS makes it explicitly clear that every respondent
who is treated for tax purposes as “married” should indicate married as the civil status. Moreover, we focus
on couples in which both husband and wife are aged 25 to 54. Since we are mainly interested in the role
of taxation in explaining international differences in hours worked of married couples, we focus on the
core age group and avoid discussing international differences in the educational systems, degrees of youth
unemployment, and early retirement programs.
      We concentrate on the sample period 2001 to 2008. We use more than one year of data and do not further
analyze the time series in order to avoid that cross-country differences might be driven by uncorrelated
business cycles. The start year is determined by the availability of the OECD Taxing Wages modules, which
are a key input into our quantitative analysis.




                                                      6
 Table 1: Cross-Country Statistics on Annual Hours Worked by Gender and Marital Status (Ages 25-54)

                                                                           Men                   Women
                                                                      Married Single          Married Single
                Mean Hours                                             1761.3     1484.6         1027.9      1189.4
                Standard Deviation of Log Hours                         0.059      0.075          0.181       0.083
                Correlation with Married Men’s Hours                     1.00        0.79           0.06        0.64


3.2     Hours Worked of Married Couples: Some Facts
Table 1 shows some statistics on hours worked per person by gender and marital status over the 18 sample
countries and averaging over the years 2001 to 2008. This is the only table containing information on hours
worked of singles, before we turn our attention exclusively to married couples. Hours worked per person are
the product of the employment rate and hours worked per employed; we discuss the breakdown into both
margins for married women in Section 6. On average, married men aged 25 to 54 work around 730 hours
per person more than married women in the same age group. Single women (including divorcées) work 160
hours more than married women, and single men 280 hours less than married men. While married women
are thus clearly the group with the lowest hours worked, they exhibit the largest variation across countries:
the standard deviation of log hours worked of married women is more than twice as large as the ones of
the other three demographic groups. Moreover, the cross-country correlation of hours worked of married
men with hours worked of single men or single women is 0.79 and 0.64, respectively, while the correlation
with hours worked of married women amounts only to 0.06. Thus, there is clearly something special about
married women, and investigating the sources of the different behavior of married men and married women
is of great interest if one wants to understand international differences in hours worked among core aged
individuals.
      Since from now on we focus on married couples, the issue of selection into marriage arises. While
we do not model this selection, we report in Figure B.1 in the Online Appendix the fraction of women in
the core age group who are married. It amounts on average to 64%, with a standard deviation of 7.5%.
Any potential selection bias could go in either direction, but we find it reassuring that the cross-country
correlation of the fraction of married women in our core age group with married women’s hours worked
is virtually zero. Similarly, the tax treatment of couples, i.e. whether a country employs a system of joint
or separate taxation, is not correlated with the marriage rate.7 Last, Chade and Ventura (2002, 2005) show
in a quantitative equilibrium model of the marriage market for the US that the marriage rate would barely
change if the US replaced the current system of joint taxation with one of separate taxation.
      Figure 2 shows average hours worked of married men (on the x-axis) and married women (on the y-axis)
   7 We compute cross-country correlations between the marriage rate and two (imperfect) measures of the degree of jointness of

taxation that we discuss later in this paper: the correlation between the marriage rate and the difference in the tax rates shown in
panel (b) of Figure 3 is 0.07, and the correlation between the marriage rate and the size of the tax structure effect shown in Table 4
is 0.09.

                                                                  7
     Figure 2: Average Annual Hours Worked Per Person of Married Women and Men (Ages 25-54)




                                        1300
                                                                                 PT          CZ
                                                                                                      US




                                        1200
                                                                            DK
                                                                   HU
                                                                  SE  PL




                                  900 1000 1100
                                    Female HWP
                                                                 NO
                                                                  FR
                                                                            BE         UK
                                                                                       AT        GR




                                        800                                  ES
                                                                      DE                    IE
                                                                                  NL
                                                                       IT
                                        700




                                                  1500    1600    1700 1800 1900                   2000    2100
                                                                      Male HWP

                                                         US   East          Scand.          West       South




aged 25 to 54 over the period 2001 to 2008 for all eighteen countries in our sample. The European countries
are grouped into four regions, namely Eastern Europe (circles: Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland), Scan-
dinavia (squares: Denmark, Norway, Sweden), Western Europe (diamonds: Austria, Belgium, Germany,
France, Ireland, Netherlands, United Kingdom), and Southern Europe (triangles: Spain, Greece, Italy, Por-
tugal), while the US is marked by an x. The figure illustrates the almost zero correlation between hours
worked of married men and married women reported in Table 1. The absence of any correlation between
hours worked of married men and women is very surprising, since one would expect factors that can poten-
tially generate differences in hours worked across countries, e.g. taxes or institutions, to have similar effects
on both men and women, at least qualitatively. Figure 2 also reflects the finding that the variation across
countries is higher for the hours of married women than for the hours of married men. Hours worked of
married men are highest in the US, followed closely by Greece, the Czech Republic, and Ireland. At the
lower end of the sample are Norway, Sweden, France, and Hungary. Norwegian married men work 350
hours less than, or only 82% of, US married men.
    For married women, there exists a regional pattern of hours worked per person, which are high in the
US, Eastern Europe, and Scandinavia, and substantially lower in Western and Southern Europe. Portugal is
a notable exception among the Southern European countries and actually features the highest hours worked
of married women among all countries in our sample. Western Europe is somewhat divided with Germany,
Ireland, and the Netherlands having relatively low hours worked, comparable to Italy and Spain, whereas
France, Belgium, the UK, and Austria have higher hours worked, but still below the level of Scandinavian
and Eastern European countries. The lowest hours worked arise in Italy with 750 hours, 485 hours less than,
or only 61% of, US married women.


                                                                             8
4      Model

4.1     A Model of Joint Household Labor Supply
We build a static model of married couples’ hours decisions to investigate in how far cross-country differ-
ences in consumption and labor income taxes contribute to the cross-country differences in male and female
labor supply presented in Figure 2. The model framework is based on Kaygusuz (2010) and features a max-
imization problem of a two person household which optimally determines male and female labor supply.
      There is a continuum of married households of mass one. Each household member exhibits one of three
possible education levels, denoted by x 2 {low, medium, high} for women and by z 2 {low, medium, high}
for men, which determine the offered wages w f (x) and wm (z). We denote the fraction of households of type
x, z by µ(x, z) with
                                                     Â Â µ(x, z) = 1.                                      (1)
                                                         x   z

Households draw a utility cost of joint work q from a distribution z (q|z) which depends on the husband’s
education level. This cost is only incurred if the wife participates in the labor market, and thus introduces
an explicit extensive margin choice for women. We abstract from modeling fixed costs of work for men. As
a consequence, they always optimally choose to provide positive hours. We follow this approach because
male participation rates in the data in our sample countries are above 90% and display only little variation
across countries. The draw q can be interpreted as a utility loss due to joint work of two household members
originating from, for example, inconvenience of scheduling joint work, home production and leisure activ-
ities, or spending less family time with children, see Kaygusuz (2010). It captures residual heterogeneity
across households - conditional on the husband’s education level - regarding the participation choice. For
each household x, z, there exists a threshold level q̄(x, z) from which onwards the utility cost of working is
so high that the woman chooses not to work, i.e. h f = 0.
      Households face two types of taxes, namely a linear consumption tax at rate tc and a non-linear labor
income tax tl , which depends on the gross incomes of husband and wife, as well as the number of children
in the household k through tax credits and/or child benefits. The maximization problem of a type {x, z}
household is given by
                                              ⇢
                                                                 1+ 1      1+ f1
                                    max           ln c       ahm f      ah f       qIh f >0                (2)
                                    hm ,h f
                                              yhh tl
                                 s.t. c =               +T                                                 (3)
                                              (1 + tc )
                                  yhh =wm (z)hm + w f (x)h f                                               (4)
                                    tl =tl (wm (z)hm , w f (x)h f , k)                                     (5)

where Ih f >0 takes the value one if the wife is working and zero otherwise, c represents household consump-
tion, and yhh represents gross household income.

                                                                   9
      T represents a lump-sum transfer from the government, which redistributes a share l 2 [0, 1] of all
government revenues:
                                                 Z •
                           l
                         1 + tc Â Â µ(x, z)
                   T=                                     tl (wm (z)h⇤m (q), w f (x)h⇤f (q), k)z (q|z)dq
                                x z                   •
                                                             Z •                                                                  (6)
                                                      +tc           wm (z)h⇤m (q) + w f (x)h⇤f (q)   z (q|z)dq ,
                                                                •


where ⇤ denotes the optimal hours choice given the draw of q.8 When deciding on how much to work,
households do not internalize that their choices impact the equilibrium transfer, but rather take the transfer
as given.
      As usual in the literature explaining aggregate hours worked differences between Europe and the US,
consumption and labor supply are assumed to be separable, and utility from consumption is logarithmic.
Therefore, cross-country differences in mean wages are irrelevant, and only cross-country differences in
the gender and education premia matter for labor supply decisions, see Online Appendix Section C.1. a
captures the relative weight on the disutility of work, and f determines the curvature of this disutility. Both
parameters are the same for men and for women.
      One might be worried that part of the international differences in married women’s hours worked across
countries are driven by differential effects of children on mothers’ hours, different life-cycle or cohort effects
across countries, or differences in the supply side rather than the demand side, all factors that our model
does not incorporate. In Online Appendix Sections B.4 and B.5, we present extensive evidence on hours
worked by presence of children, as well as hours worked for different age groups. While one can identify
country-specific idiosyncracies, these are not large enough to drive the international differences in aggregate
hours worked of married couples. Moreover, in Section C.4 in the Online Appendix, we show results from
our model focusing exclusively on women without children, and the overall model fit is qualitatively and
quantitatively very similar. Last, in Online Appendix Section B.6, we show that the hours worked differences
are robust to excluding unemployed individuals from the sample.

4.2     Some Theoretical Results
In order to highlight the key implications of differences in the tax treatment of married couples, we provide
theoretical insights from a closed-form analysis. In order to do so, we abstract from heterogeneity in educa-
tion, and assume the simplified labor income tax schedule introduced by Benabou (2002). After-tax income
is given by ynet = (1       d ) (wh)1 z , where z measures the degree of tax progressivity, and d is a measure of
the average tax rate. In the absence of any progressivity (z = 0) the average tax rate is exactly given by d .
   8 Equation (6) is derived as follows. For ease of exposition, assume there would be just one household consisting of a single

member. Total government revenues R are the sum of the revenues from the labor income tax and from the consumption tax, i.e.
R = tl + tc (c T ). T is subtracted in this calculation since the transfer is not subject to the consumption tax. Replacing c from
                             1                                 1
the budget constraint (c = 1+t c
                                 (yhh tl ) + T ), yields R = 1+t c
                                                                   [tl + tc yhh ]. The transfer T is then the fraction l of government
revenues R.


                                                                    10
In the case of full progressivity (z = 1), in turn, after tax income is independent of the gross income.
    We compare labor supply under a system of separate taxation (s) to labor supply under a system of joint
taxation ( j) built on the “German model”. Simplifying, a couple’s tax burden in Germany is calculated as
twice the tax burden of the average household income, such that net household income and the marginal
return to working an extra hour are given by
                      ✓                        ◆1 z                                           ✓                       ◆ z
                     w m hm + w f h f                     ∂ ynet, j
                                                                                               wm hm + w f h f
 ynet, j
  hh = 2(1        d)                                    )    hh
                                                                    = (1        d )(1       z)                                 wg 8 g = m, f . (7)
                            2                              ∂ hg                                      2

Under separate taxation, household net income and the marginal return to working an extra hour are

                                                                            ∂ ynet,s
  ynet,s
   hh = (1       d ) (wm hm )1 z + (1               d ) (w f h f )1 z )        hh
                                                                                     = (1     d )(1       z ) (wg hg ) z wg 8 g = m, f . (8)
                                                                             ∂ hg

Note that the marginal return to working an extra hour depends – in addition to the own wage – on the
household income in the joint taxation regime, but on the individual income in the separate taxation regime.
                                                                  net, j
                                                                ∂ yhh
Hence, the marginal tax rate (defined as 1                       ∂ hg      /wg ) is always the same for both spouses under joint
taxation, but lower (higher) for the lower (higher) earning spouse under separate taxation for z 2 (0, 1). Put
differently, under joint taxation the marginal tax rate of the primary earner (i.e. in most cases the husband) is
lower than the one he would face under separate taxation, and the marginal tax rate of the secondary earner
(i.e. in most cases the wife) is higher than the one she would face under separate taxation.9 Progressivity is a
necessary condition for this to be true, and the effect is larger the higher the progressivity of the tax system.
As a result, differences in wages between both spouses always translate into a larger optimal hours difference
between both spouses under joint taxation than under separate taxation, and this difference between the two
tax treatment regimes is increasing in tax progressivity. This can be directly seen from combining the first
order conditions (assuming an interior solution) for each spouse and under each system of taxation, because
1+z f
 1 z
      is larger than one and increasing in z :10

                                      ✓        ◆f                 ✓          ◆f 1 z                              ! 1+z f
                          h⇤mj                                                                h⇤mj
                                                                                                                    1 z
                                          wm            h⇤s             wm      1+z f                      h⇤s
                                  =                 and m   =                           )             =     m
                                                                                                                           .                   (9)
                          h⇤f j           wf            h⇤s
                                                         f              wf                    h⇤f j        h⇤s
                                                                                                            f


The two first order conditions show that if both husband and wife earn exactly the same wage, the optimal
hours ratio of both spouses is one under both joint and separate taxation. In the presence of wage differences,
the ratio of hours of the high wage spouse relative to the low wage spouse is higher under joint taxation than
   9 This results in a marriage bonus under joint taxation. Formally, the progressivity of the tax code implies that the tax burden

(net income) is a convex (concave) function of income if z 2 (0, 1). Hence, by Jensen’s inequality, the sum of the tax burden for
two different incomes is larger than twice the tax burden for the average of those two incomes.
   10 Online Appendix Section C.1 derives the two first order conditions shown in (9). Relying on the same model, we also show

there that the average labor income tax rate and the consumption tax rate only matter for the optimal hours choice in the presence
of positive transfers, while tax progressivity matters even in the absence of positive transfers. Qualitatively, the consumption tax
rate and the average labor income tax rate have the same effect on hours worked.


                                                                           11
under separate taxation. Thus, on the aggregate level, a positive gender wage gap or a high prevalence of
couples in which the husband’s educational level exceeds the wife’s educational level translate into a larger
gender hours gap under joint taxation than under separate taxation.

4.3     Model Inputs
As inputs into the model, we use country-specific information on consumption tax rates tc and non-linear
labor income taxes tl , and additionally the educational composition and matching into couples µ(x, z), male
hourly wages by education wm (z), and female hourly wages by education w f (x). Last, we need to calibrate
the two preference parameters in the utility function, a and f , and the parameters governing the fixed cost
distributions. Table B.5 in Online Appendix Section B.7 lists all data sources for all countries.

4.3.1    Consumption Taxes

Consumption tax rates for our sample countries are provided by McDaniel (2012), who calculates consump-
tion tax rates from NIPA data.11 The advantage of these tax rates over simple value added tax rates is that
they also capture excise taxes, exemptions from the value added tax, etc. They are shown in panel (a) of
Figure 3. Differences in consumption tax rates between Europe and the US are large, amounting to 14
percentage points on average. The Czech Republic has the lowest consumption tax rate in Europe at only
14.8%, and Scandinavia the highest rates, where only Norway’s is below 30%.

4.3.2    Non-Linear Labor Income Taxes

The labor income tax codes come from the OECD Taxing Wages modules. These are very similar to the
NBER TaxSim module for the US, but cover all OECD countries from 2001 onwards. The OECD Tax-
ing Wages module implements the statutory labor income tax code, including employees’ social security
contributions and cash benefits, by marital status and number of children in the household. It calculates a
household’s net income for any combination of husband’s and wife’s earnings. Standard deductions (i.e.
basic allowances, allowances for children, deduction of social security contributions) are included in these
calculations, whereas individual non-standard deductions (e.g. mortgage payment deductions, deductions of
child care expenses, deductions for expenses on household helpers) are not.12 Cash benefits include those
obtained for children. We compute net household earnings for a grid of wives’ annual earnings with 201
grid points, ranging from 0 earnings to three times the average annual earnings in the country, and for an
earnings grid with 101 grid points for husbands, ranging from 0 earnings to four times the average annual
earnings in the country.13 We then linearly interpolate in two dimensions to assign a net annual household
  11 McDaniel (2012) does not provide consumption tax rates for Hungary, which we take from the OECD.
  12 State and local income taxes are included, assuming that the individual lives in a “typical area” in terms of income taxation.

For the US, Michigan and Detroit are used.
  13 For women, we thus put in as many steps as the OECD Taxing Wages module allows. To give a specific example, for the US

for the year 2005 the difference between two annual earning levels for men amounts to 2297 US-Dollars and for women to 689
US-Dollars. Note that even though in some countries the top tax bracket applies to incomes larger than four times the average

                                                               12
                                                                         Figure 3: Model Inputs


                                (a) Consumption Tax Rate tc                                      (b) Illustrative Tax Rates: tl (0) and tl0 (hUS
                                                                                                                                              f )
        35




                                                                                            50
        30




                                                                                            40
        25




                                                                                            30
        20
    %




                                                                                        %
        15




                                                                                            20
        10




                                                                                            10
        5
        0




                                                                                            0
                        US    CZ GR ES DE UK AT PL PT BE NL IT HU FR IE NO DK SE                     US    GR IE ES HU UK AT CZ PT SE IT NO PL FR NL BE DK DE

                                               Consumption Tax Rate                                          Avg. Tax Rate: τl(0)    Avg. Marginal Tax Rate: τl'(hfUS)


                              (c) Female Education Shares in %                                                            (d) Wage Ratios


                                                                                                 4
             70
             60




                                                                                                 3
                   50
     Fraction in %




                                                                                        Wage Ratio
            40




                                                                                           2
     30      20




                                                                                                 1
             10
             0




                                                                                                 0




                         US   CZ SE PL NO DE DK HU AT IE BE NL UK FR GR IT ES PT                      US    NO SE DK DE BE NL FR UK AT CZ HU GR IT IE ES PT PL

                                         Low Educated            High Educated                                       Female-Male        High-Low Educ. Women

Note: tc are consumption tax rates as calculated by McDaniel (2012). tl (0) is the country-specific average tax rate evaluated at the
average US annual hours worked by married men, assuming the husband is earning the country-specific mean married male wage
and the wife does not work. tl0 (hUS
                                  f ) is the average marginal tax rate if the woman goes from not working to working the mean hours
of US married women and earns the country-specific mean married female wage, i.e. [tl (wm hUS           US           US            US
                                                                                               m , w f h f ) tl (wm hm , 0)]/[w f h f ].
The educational shares omit the group of medium educated women. The education premia are the wages of high educated women
divided by the wages of low educated women.


income to each possible annual hours choice of husband and wife. One additional input into the tax codes
are the number of children. From the micro data, we calculate the percentage of married couples with 0, 1,
2, 3, or 4+ children conditional on the educational match, and then take the weighted average over these tax
burdens for any pair of hours choices. Figure 1 gives an illustrative impression of the resulting tax schedules
for the US, Germany, and Sweden, holding the earnings of the other spouse fixed at one specific level. When
we use the tax schedules as model inputs, we vary of course the incomes of both spouses at the same time.
annual earnings, the wage that we assign to highly educated men and women never exceeds this threshold even for high hours
choices. There is some discretion in setting the distance between these grid points. Visual inspections of the differences in tax
burdens between grid points let us conclude that our grid choice is sufficiently precise.

                                                                                   13
     While it is impossible to summarize the complex non-linear labor income tax systems in a few numbers,
panel (b) of Figure 3 presents two illustrative measures that reflect key aspects of the labor income tax
schedule: one is the country-specific average tax rate evaluated at US mean hours worked of married men,
assuming that the husband is earning the country-specific mean married male wage and that the wife does
not work, and thus gives one of many possible measures of an average tax rate. The other one is the average
(marginal) tax rate paid by the household on the additional income earned if the woman goes from not
working to working the mean hours of US married women and earns the country-specific mean married
female wage, thereby capturing one possible measure of the interaction between progressivity and jointness
of taxation.14 We use for both men and women the corresponding US hours to show the average/marginal
tax rates faced at the mean country-specific wages for the same hours choices across all countries. Let
us stress again that these two tax rates shown here are only indicative values, and that we exploit the full
non-linearities of the labor income tax codes in our quantitative analysis.
     The US average tax rate of a single-earner married couple as depicted in the black bars of panel (b) of
Figure 3 amounts to 21%, whereas the corresponding Danish married couple faces an average tax rate of
40%, and the Spanish couple a tax rate of only 17%. The measure of the average (marginal) tax rate of the
secondary income earner, by contrast, amounts to 29% in the US, peaking at close to 50% in Germany, a
country with high progressivity and joint taxation of married couples. Compared to the large Europe-US
differences in consumption tax rates, the Europe-US differences in either of the two labor income tax rates
are smaller for the vast majority of European countries, and sometimes even negative. Female US hours
are lower than male US hours, and mean wages are always lower for women than for men. Therefore, in
countries with a progressive tax code and strictly separate taxation of married couples, the average marginal
tax rate of the wife if she starts working should be smaller than the average tax rate of the single-earner
household. Thus, one can take the difference between the average marginal tax rate of the married woman
and the average tax rate of the single-earner household as a suggestive measure of the effects of jointness
of taxation interacted with the degree of progressivity within a country. According to this measure, the
US, France, Belgium, Denmark, and Germany feature strong elements of joint taxation combined with high
levels of progressivity. For Greece, Hungary, the UK, Austria, and Sweden, by contrast, the difference is
strongly negative, indicating rather separate systems of taxation.

4.3.3    Educational Composition and Matching into Couples

We take the percentage of husbands and wives per education group, as well as their matching into couples,
directly from the data, relying on the three education groups low, medium, and high.15 The percentages of
  14 We call the average tax rate if the woman does not work t (0), and define the average marginal tax rate if the woman starts
                                                                    l
working as tl0 (hUS             US       US           US              US
                 f ) = [tl (wm hm , w f h f ) tl (wm hm , 0)]/[w f h f ]. All tax rates in panel b of Figure 3 are reported for couples
without children. Children decrease tl (0) via tax credits etc. (the effect is rather similar across countries), but hardly affect tl0 (hUS
                                                                                                                                         f ).
  15 Low education is defined as primary and lower secondary education (ISCED categories 0 to 2), medium education as upper

secondary and non-tertiary post-secondary education (ISCED categories 3 and 4), and high education as any tertiary education
(ISCED categories 5 and above). In the US, low education is defined by having completed at most 11th grade of high school;
medium education by having completed the 12th grade of high school, having a high school diploma, or attended some college; and

                                                                    14
women with low and high education, omitting the group of medium educated women, are shown in panel
(c) of Figure 3. There are substantial differences in the educational composition: the US features the lowest
share of low educated women, amounting to 8%, and the highest share of high educated ones, amounting to
46%. The share of low educated women is largest in the Southern European countries, ranging from 34%
in Greece to 73% in Portugal. It is also relatively high in the Western European countries. The fraction of
highly educated married women is relatively high in Scandinavia and Western Europe with the exception
of Austria, while the Eastern European countries and Austria and Germany feature the highest share of
medium educated women. Online Appendix Table B.11 reports the same shares for married men, which are
very similar. Moreover, it shows a simple correlation coefficient of the matching into couples between the
three education groups.

4.3.4    Gender and Education Wage Ratios

To calculate hourly wages, we divide earnings by hours. Unfortunately, the ELFS does not provide earnings
data, and the German Microcensus only net earnings. Therefore, we use the EU Statistics of Income and
Living Conditions (EU-SILC) to compute mean wages for each gender-education cell. This European house-
hold data set captures income and usual hours, but features a sample size an order of magnitude smaller than
the ELFS. For married women, the issue of self-selection into employment arises. If high ability women
of each education group are more likely to join the labor force, then observed mean wages overestimate
the mean of offered wages, see e.g. Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008). We therefore apply a simple two-stage
Heckman procedure to impute wages of non-working women. The exclusion restrictions are that the income
of the husband as well as the presence of children do not directly influence the wage of a woman, see e.g.
Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008).
    Panel (d) of Figure 3 shows the corresponding mean gender wage ratios in each country, as well as the
education premium (defined as the ratio of wages for high and low educated people) for women.16 The
average female-male wage ratio varies from 0.66 in Spain to 0.85 in Denmark and Belgium. Its variation
across countries is thus small compared to the variation in education premia, which range from 1.1 in
Norway to 3.6 in Poland.17 The education premia are generally low in the Scandinavian countries, and high
in Southern Europe.18
high education by having at least a college degree. See Online Appendix Section B.2 for details how we proceed for Scandinavia,
where the data do not contain household identifiers.
   16 Corresponding education premia for men are shown in Table B.11 in the Online Appendix and are largely similar. There we

also report the wage ratio between high and medium educated individuals by gender.
   17 In Poland, both the shares of high and low educated women are relatively small, indicating potentially larger selection than in

other countries.
   18 We conduct two robustness checks with respect to wages, which are discussed in Online Appendix Section C.4. In the first

robustness check, no Heckman-correction is applied on female wages and only observed wages are used. In the second robustness
check, we allow for wage heterogeneity within each education group. Our country-specific estimate of heterogeneity is the standard
deviation of the residuals from a regression of log male wages on year and education dummies.




                                                                15
4.4     Redistribution of Government Revenues
The government redistributes a fraction l 2 [0, 1] of all government revenues back to the households in
a lump-sum fashion. In the benchmark calibration, we follow Rogerson (2008), Ohanian et al. (2008),
and Ragan (2013), and assume full redistribution of government revenues and thus set l = 1. In Online
Appendix Section C.4, we show results from two alternative specifications with either no redistribution of
government revenues (i.e setting l = 0), or from setting l equal to 1 minus twice the share of military
expenditures from all government expenditures, similar to the specification used by Prescott (2004).

4.5     Calibration of Preference Parameters
As in Kaygusuz (2010), we set the labor supply elasticity f = 0.5, which is consistent with the estimates
surveyed in Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), Domeij and Flodén (2006), and Keane (2011).19 The weight on
the disutility of work (a) is calibrated to match average hours worked per person by men (recall that we do
not model an explicit intensive margin for them) and hours worked per employed woman, using the US as
the benchmark country.
      Again following Kaygusuz (2010) and Guner et al. (2012a, 2012b), the utility cost parameter is dis-
tributed according to a flexible gamma distribution, with the shape parameter kz and scale parameter qz
being conditional on the husband’s type:

                                                                   exp( q/qz )
                                            q ⇠ z (q|z) ⌘ qkz 1                   ,                         (10)
                                                                     G(kz )qzkz

where G(·) is the Gamma function. For each husband’s education level z, we select the parameters kz and qz
to match as closely as possible the female labor force participation rates by their wives’ own education levels
x 2 {low, medium, high}. For given preference parameters a and f , and conditional on being married to a
type z husband, the three different education levels x and implied wages generate three different threshold
levels q̄(x, z) at which a woman of type x is indifferent between working and not working. Assume for
simplicity that all type z husbands work the same amount of hours. Women with more education, i.e. a
higher wage, will have a higher threshold q, and therefore a higher labor force participation rate, for any
given distribution of q. This pattern is also prevalent in the data, i.e. conditional on the husband’s education,
the female labor force participation rate is increasing in the woman’s own education. The parameters kz and
qz are then selected to ensure that the mass of women below these thresholds corresponds to the empirically
observed female participation rates by female education conditional on the husband’s education.
      Table 2 shows the calibrated parameters, as well as the targeted data and model moments and their
difference. Since we have more moments than parameters, we are not matching any moment perfectly.
Hours worked per employed US married woman are 2.6% lower in the model than in the data, and hours
worked per married man are 1.7% higher than in the data. The average female employment rates by the
  19 Robustness checks with respect to this parameter are shown in Online Appendix Section C.4.




                                                             16
                     Table 2: Data Targets from US and Calibrated Preference Parameters

                                              Parameters              Data    Model     DModel-Data

           Hours Worked:                       a = 0.469
           HWPm                                                       1970     2003          33
           HWE f                                                      1746     1701         -45

           Female Employment Rates by Husband’s and Own Education (in %)
           Low educ. husband:          klow = 1.064, qlow = 0.263
             Low educ. woman                                           42.4      44.2         1.8
             Medium educ. woman                                        63.3      60.3         3.0
             High educ. woman                                          76.1      77.6         1.5

           Medium educ. husband:       kmed = 1.073, qmed = 0.158
             Low educ. woman                                           48.4      50.1         1.7
             Medium educ. woman                                        71.2      68.6         2.6
             High educ. woman                                          83.2      85.8         2.6

           High educ. husband:        khigh = 0.521, qhigh = 0.336
             Low educ. woman                                           49.6      51.3         1.7
             Medium educ. woman                                        66.2      63.0         3.2
             High educ. woman                                          73.7      75.2         1.5


husband’s education are matched almost perfectly. Employment rates of low and high educated women are
however slightly higher in the model than in the data, and those of medium educated women are slightly
lower.

4.6      Model Fit
Even though we only target average hours by gender, the model also replicates the gradients by education
fairly well, see Table C.1 in the Online Appendix. The model is only somewhat off for the low educated:
hours per employed low educated married woman are underpredicted by 9%, and hours per person of low
educated married men are overpredicted by 18%. This is due to the relatively high non-employment rates
among low educated married men suppressing their hours worked per person, which the model does not
capture.
      We do a further validity check of the model by analyzing its performance in matching the time-series of
hours worked of married couples in the US. To do that, we generate the US-specific model inputs back to
the year 1979 and plug them into the model, keeping the preference parameters fixed. This exercise is in the
spirit of Kaygusuz (2010), who analyzes only the time period from 1980 to 1990, which we extend through


                                                      17
2008. The model correctly predicts hardly any change in hours worked of married men over the period of
three decades. For married women, the model captures both the increase in the employment rate and in
hours worked per employed from 1979 to 2008 almost perfectly, with some deviations of the employment
rates in model and data in the 1990s. Details are shown in Online Appendix Section C.3. Thus, this simple
model can capture the time-series development of hours in the US very well.


5     Results
Keeping the preference parameters fixed across countries, we use country-specific labor income tax systems
and consumption tax rates, plus wages and the educational composition (i.e. the educational distribution by
gender and the matching into couples), in order to obtain predicted hours worked of married couples across
countries. We first present the cross-country predictions of hours worked per married person, and then break
them down by gender. In a decomposition analysis, we evaluate the relative importance of consumption
and labor income taxes in explaining the cross-country variations of married couples’ hours worked. To
understand the effects of international differences in labor income taxation better, we further decompose
them into differences in average tax rates and differences in the tax structure, i.e. the tax treatment of married
couples and the progressivity of the tax code. Last, we also analyze the relative importance of country-
specific educational compositions and wages for the results, and their interactions with the labor income
tax code. In Online Appendix Section C.4, we conduct several robustness checks: we restrict the analysis
to households without children; we consider higher values for the labor supply elasticity of women; we
redistribute a lower share of government revenues as in Prescott (2004) or none at all; we use observed rather
than selection-corrected wages for women; and finally, we introduce wage heterogeneity within education
groups.

5.1    Hours Worked per Person in Model and Data
Table 3 shows in the first column the percent difference in married couples’ hours worked per person be-
tween Europe and the US in the data, and in the second column the model predicted percent difference. The
third column then divides these two numbers to obtain the fraction of the data difference that is explained
by the model. These columns just focus on the average Europe-US gap in hours worked; country-specific
results presented in levels of hours can be seen in Figure 4. Column 4 of Table 3 presents the correlation
between hours in the data and the model, and column 5 the slope of a regression line of model predicted
hours on data hours, as depicted in Figure 4. In both the regression and the calculation of the correlation, we
exclude the US, which is the baseline country for the calibration.20 Thus, these two columns do not refer to
   20 Thereby, the correlation is the same whether applied to the level of European hours as presented in Figure 4, or the deviation

from US hours as presented in Table 3. Note that correlation and regression slope contain independent valuable information.
The correlation captures how well the ordering of countries in the model reflects the one in the data, while the slope captures
additionally how the standard deviation created by the model compares to the standard deviation in the data. Formally, b =
corr(hdata , hmodel ) ssmodel
                        data
                              . A perfect model fit would result in both a correlation and slope of 1. However, it would theoretically be
possible to obtain model results in which the correlation is 1 but the slope very low, or the slope is 1 but the correlation very low.

                                                                  18
                          Table 3: Hours Worked per Married Person in Data and Model


                    Eu.-US Hours Gap (all in %)                     Variation within Europe           Corr. (HWPm , HWP f )
                Data    Model    Fraction Explained                Correlation    Regr. Slope         Data      Model
  Total         13.7         9.9               72.2                   0.46              0.41           0.06        0.33
  Men           11.2         6.5               57.7                   0.43              0.47             –          –
  Women         17.7        15.7               88.4                   0.43              0.27             –          –
Note: Column 1 shows the Europe-US hours differences in % in the data, and column 2 the corresponding difference in the model.
Column 3 shows the fraction of the data explained by the model. Column 4 indicates the cross-country correlation of model and
data hours, and column 5 the slope of a regression line of model predicted hours on data hours, both times excluding the US.
Column 6 states the cross-country correlation of hours worked of married men and married women in the data, and column 7 in the
model.


the Europe-US hours gap, but instead focus solely on the explanatory power of the model for the variation of
hours worked within Europe. The first row of the table refers to married couples (summing hours of husband
and wife), the second row to married men, and the third row to married women. The last two columns show
the correlation of hours worked of married men and married women in the data (column 6) and in the model
(column 7).
    The model correctly predicts uniformly lower hours in Europe than in the US. Through the lens of
the model, differences in consumption and labor income taxes, together with wages and the educational
composition, can account on average for 72% of the hours worked difference of married couples between
Europe and the US. Regarding the cross-country variation within Europe, the correlation between model
and data hours is 0.46, and the regression slope amounts to 0.41. As can be seen in Panel (a) of Figure 4, the
model fit is universally quite decent. For half of the sample countries, the difference between hours in model
and data is smaller than 100 hours annually. The poorest fits arise for Spain and Denmark, where hours in
the model are 200 hours, or 16%, larger than in the data for Spain, and 180 hours, or 12%, smaller than in
the data for Denmark. These results are driven by a poor fit for Spanish men and Danish women, as we will
discuss later. Moreover, the model is largely able to replicate the low correlation of male and female hours
worked per person in the data. As the last two columns of Table 3 show, the correlation amounts to 0.06 in
the data, and to 0.33 in the model.
    The next two rows of Table 3 break the previous results down by gender. Differences in our model
features explain slightly more than half of the average Europe-US gap in married men’s hours worked. The
explanatory power of the within-Europe variation in married men’s hours worked is very similar to the one
for total hours worked. As panel (b) of Figure 4 shows, the fit is worst for France and Spain, where predicted
hours worked of married men are 310 hours larger than hours in the data. The poor overall fit for Spain is
thus driven by the poor fit for married men.
    We now turn to hours worked of married women in the last row of Table 3. Through the lens of the model,
differences in consumption and labor income taxes, together with wages and the educational composition,
can account for 88% of the Europe-US hours gap in married women’s hours worked. Not only the average

                                                              19
                               Figure 4: Country-Specific Results: Hours Worked per Married Person


                                                                                       (a) Men + Women




                                                                   1600
                                                                                                                                                 US

                                                                                                             GR                             CZ

                                                                                                        UK




                                                                   1500
                                                                                            ES   FR                                   PT
                                                                                                           PL
                                                                                                       AT HU
                                                                                                  NO
                                                                                                 IE



                                                              Model
                                                                                                        SE




                                                              1400
                                                                                           NL


                                                                                 IT
                                                                   1300               DE

                                                                                                                 DK
                                                                                                 BE
                                                                   1200




                                                                          1200          1300       1400          1500                       1600
                                                                                                   Data

                                                                                      CorrData,Model=0.46 ΔDEu-US=-220 h
                                                                                      Slope=0.41          ΔMEu-US=-159 h


                                              (b) Men                                                                                                   (c) Women
               2100




                                                                                                                1000 1100 1200 1300



                                              ES
               2000




                                                                                                                                                                                     US
                                                   PT             CZGR US
                                                                                                                                                                               HU
                                   FR
                                                                                                                                                               GR         NO             CZ
                                                                                                                                                              ATUK
                                        PL              UK
                1900




                                                                                                                                                                               SE
                                                             IE
             Model




                                                                                                                Model




                                                                                                                                                                               PL
                                        IT
                                        DE                                                                                                   NL IE                   FR                  PT
                                                   NL AT
          1800




                              NO
                                HU                                                                                                                    ES
                                                                                                                         900




                               SE
                                                                                                                                                                                    DK
                                             BE                                                                                             IT
               1700




                                                                                                                                                   DE          BE
                                                                                                                         800




                                             DK
               1600




                                                                                                                         700




                       1600        1700           1800  1900              2000        2100                                            700    800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                     Data                                                                                                     Data

                                   CorrData,Model=0.43 ΔDEu-US=-221 h                                                                         CorrData,Model=0.43 ΔDEu-US=-219 h
                                   Slope=0.47          ΔMEu-US=-130 h                                                                         Slope=0.27          ΔMEu-US=-188 h

Note: CorrData,Model refers to the cross-country correlation of model and data hours, and Slope to the slope of a regression line
of model predicted hours on data hours as depicted in the figure, both times excluding the US. DD Eu US gives the average hours
difference in levels between Europe and the US in the data, and DM
                                                                 Eu US in the model.



Europe-US hours gap, but also the variation within Europe is explained fairly well: the correlation between
model and data hours amounts to 0.43. However, the regression slope is smaller than for men with a slope
of 0.27. As panel (c) of Figure 4 shows, the model fit is decent for the majority of countries. Importantly,

                                                                                                 20
on average the model correctly predicts the small hours differences to the US for Eastern European and
Scandinavian countries, and the larger hours differences to the US for Western and Southern European
countries. Two important outliers are however Denmark and Portugal. For Denmark, the model does not
replicate the relatively high hours worked in the data, but predicts significantly lower hours than in the
other Scandinavian countries, resulting in a difference of 335 hours worked between model and data hours.
This drives the poor overall fit for hours of Danish married couples in panel (a). For Portugal, the model
predicts relatively low hours worked, while in fact Portuguese married women work more hours than US
married women, resulting in a difference of 270 hours between model and data hours. Denmark is an outlier
relative to the other Scandinavian countries when it comes to the model predictions, and Portugal is an
outlier relative to the other Southern European countries when it comes to the data. The drivers of the poor
fit for Portugal and Denmark are discussed in the next subsection. Omitting Portugal and Denmark from
the analysis increases the slope of the regression line to 0.44 and the correlation between model and data to
0.63.

5.2     Decomposition Analysis
To understand the relative importance of labor income and consumption taxes in explaining the cross-country
differences in hours worked of married men and women, and the economic mechanisms driving the results,
we simulate the model changing the input factors to country-specific levels separately and not all together.
In Table 4, we present results for married men and married women setting only one feature of the economic
environment country-specific and leaving all others as in the US. The table presents the average married male
and female Europe-US hours gaps in the data and in the model. With regard to the model fit of the within-
European variation, we focus on married women only, and show the corresponding results for married men
in Online Appendix Table C.5.21
      The first row of Table 4 shows the Europe-US hours gap for married men and women in the data along
with the empirical cross-country correlation between married men’s and women’s hours worked. Row 2
replicates the results from Table 3, in which the model is solved for each country with the full country-
specific environment. The next six rows set only one single element in Equations (1) to (6) specific to the
respective country, namely consumption tax rates (tc ) in row 3 and non-linear labor income taxes (tl ) in row
4, while keeping all others at the US level. Rows 5 and 6 further decompose the non-linear labor income
tax schedules into the tax structure and the average tax rate as we describe below. Finally, wages (w) are set
country-specific in row 7, and the demographic composition and matching into couples (µ(x, z)) in row 8. In
all these experiments, we adjust the transfers such that the government always maintains a balanced budget.
When applying the country-specific labor income tax schedule, we account for the fact that tax systems
are defined relative to the wage level in a country: for each combination of husband-wife hours choices,
we calculate the country-specific tax rate using the US gender-specific education premia and the country-
   21 Graphs showing country-specific results for women if each time only one feature is set country-specific, while the rest remain

at the US level, are presented in Online Appendix Figure C.3.


                                                                21
                 Table 4: Decomposing the Effects of Different Model Inputs on Labor Supply


                                       Men                                  Women
                               Eu.-US Hours Gap         Eu.-US Hours Gap         Variation within Eu.     Corr. (HWPm , HWP f )

  Data                                 -11.2                   -17.7                      –                       0.06
  Experiment                  Model       % Expl.      Model        % Expl.    Corr.     Regr. Slope            Model
  All Country-Specific           6.5         57.7       15.7         88.4      0.43           0.27                0.33
  tc                             2.9         26.2        8.4         47.5      0.24            0.05               0.99
  tl                             4.9         43.5        2.0         11.3      0.17            0.13               0.56
   Tax Structure                -4.1         36.6        0.5         -3.0      0.27            0.13               0.32
   Avg. Tax Rate                -0.8          6.9       -2.5         14.3     -0.01           -0.01               1.00
  w                              0.5          4.2        0.7          3.8      0.06           0.02                0.13
  µ(x, z)                        2.2         19.2        6.6         37.3      0.36           0.12                0.79
Note: Row 1 shows the Europe-US hours gap in % for married men and women in the data along with the empirical cross-country
correlation between married men’s and women’s hours worked. Row 2 shows the full model results if all input factors are set
country-specific. For the decompositions in rows 3 to 8, exactly one model input is set country-specific, and the rest are left
unchanged at their US values. For the quantitative predictions of our model, Column 1 shows the predicted Europe-US hours
differences in % in the model for married men, column 2 the fraction of the data explained by the model for married men. Columns
3 and 4 show the same two statistics for married women. Column 5 gives the cross-country correlation between model and data
predicted hours for married women, and column 6 the slope of a regression line of model predicted hours on data hours for married
women, both times excluding the US. Column 7 states the cross-country correlation of hours worked of married men and married
women.


specific mean wage, and then apply this tax rate to the US gross earnings implied by the same husband-wife
hours choices. Similarly, when applying the gender-education-specific wages from a European country,
we leave the mean wage at the US level such that the US labor income tax schedule can be meaningfully
applied. Details of these procedures are in Appendix A.

Consumption Tax Rates

Row 3 starts the decomposition with applying the country-specific consumption tax rates. Not surprisingly,
given the universally higher consumption tax rates in Europe than in the US reported in panel (a) of Figure 3,
consumption tax rates can explain a significant part of the lower hours of European men and women, namely
26% of the male hours gap and even 48% of the female hours gap. The disincentive effect of European
consumption taxes is smaller for men, predicting 3% lower hours worked than in the US, than for women,
predicting 8% lower hours worked. This is due to the higher implied female elasticity of labor supply, which
arises because women face lower wages and are affected both along the extensive and intensive margin.22
The cross-country correlation between male and female hours if only the consumption tax is set country-
specific amounts to 0.99, as can be seen in the last column of Table 4: qualitatively, consumption taxes affect
   22 Note that, even if we would model an extensive margin for men, we would expect only minimal effects along this margin due

to their already very high participation rates.

                                                               22
male and female hours in exactly the same way.
    While consumption taxes are the overall most important driver of the Europe-US hours difference for
married women, they do not help explaining the variation of married women’s hours worked within Europe.
In fact, the regression slope is almost zero, and the correlation between hours in model and data negative
when only consumption taxes are set country-specific (see columns 5 and 6). Consumption tax rates are
largest in the Scandinavian countries, which however feature comparatively high hours worked of married
women, such that the resulting correlation between hours in model and data is negative.23

Non-Linear Labor Income Taxes

While for women consumption taxes are on average the main factor driving the lower European hours, labor
income taxes are the main factor explaining low European male hours: labor income taxes alone predict 4.9
percent lower hours of married men in Europe than in the US, thereby explaining 44 percent of the male
Europe-US hours gap. Their disincentive effect on male hours worked is thus larger than the disincentive
effect coming from consumption taxes, which explain only 26 percent of the Europe-US hours gap. For
married women, however, the picture now looks very different. Labor income taxes in fact predict only 2
percent lower hours worked for European married women than US ones, thus explaining only 11 percent of
the hours gap, compared to 48 percent explained by consumption taxes. Yet, they do matter for explaining
the variation of hours worked of married women within Europe: the correlation between model and data
amounts to 0.17, and the regression slope is 0.13 if only labor income taxes are set country-specific. Another
striking difference to consumption taxes, which induce a near perfect correlation between hours worked of
men and women, is the lower cross-country correlation of 0.56 between hours worked of married men and
women if only the European labor income tax systems are introduced in the US economy (see last column).
    What can explain that labor income taxes have very different effects on the labor supply of married
men and married women? We derive more insights into this by further decomposing the non-linear labor
income tax schedule into two components: first, the tax structure, and second the average tax rate. The
tax structure captures the progressivity of the tax schedule along with the tax treatment of married couples,
which together define how the marginal tax rate of each spouse changes with the own and the spousal
income. We distinguish between the tax structure and the average tax rate by conducting the following
experiment: to capture the effect of the tax structure alone, we calculate the taxes implied by the country-
specific tax code as in Equation (A.2), but then levy an additional linear tax or subsidy on the household
such that government revenues are left unchanged at the US level.24 Put differently, one may think of this
experiment as a reform which implements a different tax structure but is required to be revenue neutral. The
effect of the country-specific average tax rate is then indirectly inferred by the difference in hours worked
  23 For the same reason, the correlation between hours in model and data is in fact positive for married men if only the consumption

tax rates are set country-specific (see Online Appendix Table C.5). Scandinavian countries feature the lowest hours of European
married men.
  24 The household’s income tax liability (Equation 5) hence becomes t = t (w (z)h , w (x)h , k) + q y , with q > 0 being an
                                                                       l    l m     m    f     f         hh
additional linear tax and q < 0 being a subsidy.


                                                                23
between setting the entire labor income tax schedule country-specific, or shifting it up or down to match the
US government revenues.
    The fifth and sixth rows of Table 4 show the resulting decomposition of the labor income tax effect into
the tax structure and the average tax rate. For married men, the tax structure predicts 4.1 percent lower
hours worked in Europe than in the US, but the average tax rate only 0.8 percent lower hours. Thus, the
average labor income tax rates contribute only minimally to explaining the lower hours of married men in
Europe than in the US, but the European tax structure alone explains 37 percent of the hours difference to
the US. For married women, on the other hand, the average tax rate predicts 2.5 percent lower hours worked
in Europe than in the US, but the tax structure 0.5 percent higher hours worked. While on average across all
European countries, the effect of average tax rates is thus qualitatively similar for married men and women,
the effect of the tax structure goes in the opposite direction for both sexes. This also becomes evident in
the predicted correlation between male and female hours, which amounts to 1 if the average tax rate is set
country-specific, and to only 0.32 if the tax structure is set country-specific.
    To explain the opposite effect of imposing the European tax structures on hours worked of married
men and married women, we refer to the predictions of the theoretical model in Subsection 4.2. Moving
from joint towards separate taxation decreases the optimal hours gap between spouses, i.e. increases hours
worked of married women and decreases hours worked of married men. Varying the system of taxation
across countries thus induces a negative cross-country correlation between married men’s and women’s
hours worked. Specifically, the degree of joint taxation is more pronounced in the US than in most European
countries. This is indicated in panel (b) of Figure 3: the difference between both suggestive tax rates is for
all countries – except Denmark, Belgium, and Germany – smaller than in the US. Based on the tax treament
of married couples alone, the US thus has a higher optimal hours gap than a European country with separate
taxation. On average, this leads to lower predicted hours of married men and higher ones of married women
if the tax structure is set to the European level.
    In addition to the tax treatment of married couples, the tax structure also incorporates progressivity,
whose effect on hours interacts with the tax treatment. The tax codes of European countries on average
feature higher levels of progressivity than the US one, as shown in an illustrative example in Figure C.1
in the Online Appendix. The effect of progressivity on hours worked generally depends on the position of
an individual’s income in the earnings distribution of the country. In a system of joint taxation, increased
progressivity leads to lower hours of both married men and married women, as long as married couples are
relatively high income earners. Under separate taxation, increased progressivity predicts on average lower
hours worked for married men, who tend to be high income earners, while the predicted effect on married
women’s hours worked is somewhat unclear, depending on their relative position in the earnings scale of the
respective country. Therefore, also the predicted cross-country correlation between hours worked of married
men and women based on international variation in progressivity could be either positive or negative.25 For
men, the two effects of the tax structure – coming through the tax treatment and through progessivity – go
  25 Note that we cannot report the effects and implied correlations from tax treatment and progressivity separately, since our

framework does not allow us to isolate each effect individually.

                                                                   24
on average in the same direction if European tax structures are imposed on US married men. This leads to
the large explanatory power of the tax structure for the male Europe-US hours gap.
    While the tax structure on average does not contribute at all to explaining the lower hours worked of
married women in Europe than in the US, it is crucial for explaining the variation of married women’s hours
worked within Europe. As columns 5 and 6 show, the correlation between hours of married women in model
and data is 0.27 when only the tax structure is set country-specific, and the slope of the regression line is 0.13.
The tax treatment, together with the progressivity of the tax system, thus leads to variation in predicted hours
worked across the European countries that is in line with the data. Apart from the educational composition,
which we discuss below, the tax structure has the largest explanatory power for the variation of married
women’s hours worked within Europe.
    Turning to the average labor income tax rates, their effects on hours worked are qualitatively the same for
men and women, with again larger effects for women due to the higher implied female elasticity, similar to
the effects of consumption tax rates. Quantitatively, the disincentive effects of consumption taxes are larger
than those of the average labor income tax rates for both men and women, which is in line with the larger
consumption tax rate differences between Europe and the US shown in panel (a) compared to panel (b) of
Figure 3. Higher average labor income tax rates predict 2.5 percent lower hours in Europe than in the US
for married women, corresponding to 14 percent of the total hours gap. Yet, differences in the average tax
rate do not aid in explaining the variation of married women’s hours worked across European countries.26
    Summarizing, to explain the variation of married women’s hours worked across Europe, it is crucial
to take differences in the tax structure into account.27 However, since the US features a system of joint
taxation, while many European countries feature tax systems closer to separate taxation, the tax structure
cannot explain the on average lower hours worked of European than US married women. For married men,
by contrast, the tax structure predicts significantly lower hours worked in Europe than in the US due to higher
levels of progressivity and tax systems closer to separate taxation in Europe. Average tax rates predict on
average slightly lower hours worked in Europe than in the US for both married men and women.

Wages

The effect of the country-specific gender and education wage premia on hours worked in Europe is on
average relatively small, as can be seen in the seventh row of Table 4. Wages explain 4% of the average
Europe-US hours gap for both men and women, and have only small explanatory power for the variation of
married women’s hours worked within Europe. However, introducing country-specific wage gaps leads to a
low correlation of hours worked of married men and women, as one would expect at least for gender wage
gaps. The wage premia interact of course with the tax systems in the respective countries. Thus, one could
  26 For married men, by contrast, the average tax rate is a more important driver of within-Europe variation in hours worked than

the tax structure; see Online Appendix Table C.5.
  27 Online Appendix Section C.5 compares the model performance to a model relying on linear tax rates as calculated by Prescott

(2004), McDaniel (2011) and Ragan (2013) as inputs, and confirms that a model with linear taxes cannot explain hours worked of
married women in Europe well.


                                                               25
potentially obtain different effects of the tax structure if the wage premia are set first to the European level.
We discuss this interaction effect below in conjunction with Figure 5.

Educational Composition

Turning to the educational composition and matching into couples in row 8, one can see that imposing
European data induces a small increase in hours worked for married men of 2.2%, but a significant decrease
of hours worked of married women of 6.6%, thus explaining 37% of the Europe-US hours gap for married
women. After consumption tax rates, the educational composition is the second most important model
input explaining the lower average hours of married women in Europe than in the US.28 The large effect of
imposing the European educational composition on women’s hours worked arises because the gradient of
employment rates by education is substantial in the US, while the gradient of hours worked per employed
by education is relatively small. Thus, imposing a different educational composition has much larger effects
on married women, whose employment rates differ by education in the model, than on married men. Given
that the share of high-educated individuals is highest in the US, and the share of low-educated is lowest, as
can be seen in panel (c) of Figure 3 for married women, imposing the European educational composition
significantly decreases predicted hours worked of married women there. Since men married to non-working
women work longer hours, having more of these men drives up average predicted male hours worked in
Europe, despite the fact that the shares of low- and medium-educated married men are also higher in Europe
than in the US (see Online Appendix Table B.11).
    Moreover, the educational composition contributes significantly to explaining the variation of hours
worked of married women within Europe: the correlation between married women’s hours in model and
data is 0.36 if only the educational composition is set country-specific. The high share of low educated
married women in Southern Europe predicts significantly lower hours there, which is in line with the data.
Last, the country-specific educational composition leads to a strong negative cross-country correlation of
-0.79 between male and female hours. Yet, one has to keep in mind that it causes only a small variation in
male hours, and thus cannot contribute significantly to explaining the low correlation of male and female
hours worked in the data overall. As for wages, the educational composition and especially the matching
into couples interact with the tax structure of a country, which we discuss now.

Interaction Effects and Country-Specific Results

In the decomposition exercise carried out so far, we left all model features at the US level and set only
one specific feature to the country-specific level. To understand in how far the labor income tax system,
and especially the tax structure, interacts with wages and the educational composition, we now conduct
a cumulative decomposition exercise in which we set the model features to the country-specific level in a
  28 Bick et al. (2017) conduct a simple decomposition exercise that decomposes the total Europe-US hours difference into differ-

ences of the components of labor supply (employment rates, weeks worked, and weekly hours worked in a work week) and the
demographic composition. They find that one third to one half of the Europe-US hours difference of all individuals aged 15 to 64
can be attributed to differences in the educational composition.

                                                              26
cumulative fashion. We start out by setting the educational composition and wages country-specific, and put
the labor income tax structure last. We focus in this analysis on hours worked of married women. Figure
5 presents the results, and also allows analyzing individual countries. It starts in panel (a) with setting all
model inputs at the US level, predicting the same hours as in the US for all countries. It then adds the
different country-specific inputs sequentially into the model.
    Panel (b) introduces the country-specific educational composition into the model. The high correlation
between model and data hours if the educational composition is set country-specific from the last row of
Table 4 is visualized here. The educational composition tilts the model predicted hours in the right direction:
given the higher share of low- and medium-educated married women, it reduces predicted hours in Southern
and Western Europe, and to a much smaller degree in Eastern Europe. Hours in Scandinavian countries are
on average unchanged. Thus, especially for Southern Europe, and to some degree for Western Europe, the
educational composition is a significant factor explaining lower hours worked than in the US. Yet, at the
same time the educational composition is the main reason for the poor fit of hours worked of Portuguese
married women. As panel (c) of Figure 3 shows, the share of low educated women is by far the highest
in Portugal, amounting to over 70%. Thus, the educational composition alone predicts 216 fewer hours in
Portugal than in the US, while in fact Portuguese married women work more hours than US married women.
    Panel (c) adds country-specific wages to the educational composition.29 Adding the country-specific
education-gender-wage premia leaves the average hours difference with the US almost unchanged, but im-
proves especially the regression slope, which rises to 0.30. As one can see in the figure, this is driven by
the negative effect of wages on predicted hours in the three Southern European countries Italy, Greece, and
Spain. This creates more variation in the model predicted hours, which given a slightly increased correlation
results in a higher regression slope. As panel (d) of Figure 3 shows, education premia tend to be high in
Southern European countries by international comparison. After imposing the high share of low-educated
individuals there in panel (b), adding the education premia therefore decreases predicted hours in Southern
Europe strongly. This highlights a strong interactive effect between the wage structure and the educational
composition, since imposing only European wage premia results in a regression slope of essentially 0, as
Table 4 shows.
    Panel (d) then adds on top of this the country-specific consumption tax rates. Consumption taxes shift
predicted hours in Europe substantially further downward, by on average 103 hours. They are thus the
most important driver of low average hours of European married women compared to US married women.
However, this downward shift occurs in an almost parallel fashion, with only slightly larger effects for the
Scandinavian countries. Thus, consumption taxes do not explain any additional variation within Europe:
the slope of the regression line of model hours on data hours falls, as does the correlation between hours in
model and data.
    Panel (e) now uses the average labor income tax rate as an additional country-specific model input.
Average European hours fall by 19 hours compared to panel (d). Average tax rates thus overall predict
  29 Given log utility of consumption, differences in mean wages do not affect choices at all, and only the education-gender-wage

premia matter, see Online Appendix Section C.1.

                                                              27
  Figure 5: Decomposition – Cumulative Country-Specific Results for Hours Worked of Married Women
                                            (a) US Environment                                                              (b) + Educational Composition


               1000 1100 1200 1300




                                                                                                           1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                                                                                                                                               SE
                                            ITNL DE
                                                 IEES           AT
                                                                 GR
                                                                 BE
                                                                  UKFR NO           PL
                                                                                     SE
                                                                                     HUDK
                                                                                        USCZ
                                                                                           PT                                                                           NO    PL US
                                                                                                                                                                                  DK CZ
                                                                                                                                                                               HU
                                                                                                                                               IE
                                                                                                                                               DE            BE FR
                                                                                                                                                            ATUK
                                                                                                                                          NL                 GR
                                                                                                                                        IT
                                                                                                                                                 ES
               Model




                                                                                                           Model
                                                                                                                                                                                         PT
                        900




                                                                                                                    900
                        800




                                                                                                                    800
                        700




                                                                                                                    700
                                     700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300                                                700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                              Data                                                                                        Data

                                                  CorrData,Model=0.00                                                                        CorrData,Model=0.36
                                                  Slope=0.00                     ΔMEu-US=0                                                   Slope=0.12                  ΔMEu-US=-79


                                                    (c) + Wages                                                                        (d) + Consumption Tax
               1000 1100 1200 1300




                                                                                                           1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                                                        DK
                                                                            NO       HU
                                                                                     SE
                                                                 BE
                                                                                         USCZ                                                                                        US
                                                   DE
                                             NL                 ATUKFR              PL
                                                                                                                                               DE            BE         NO     HU CZ
                                                   IE                                                                                                                            DK
                                                                                                                                                            ATUK              PL
                                                                                                                                         NL                                    SE
               Model




                                                                                                           Model




                                                                                                                                                                   FR
                                                                GR                             PT                                              IE
                                            IT                                                                                                              GR
                        900




                                                                                                                    900




                                                                                                                                                                                         PT

                                                     ES                                                                                 IT
                        800




                                                                                                                    800




                                                                                                                                                 ES
                        700




                                                                                                                    700




                                     700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300                                                700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                              Data                                                                                        Data

                                                 CorrData,Model=0.43                                                                         CorrData,Model=0.38
                                                 Slope=0.30                  ΔMEu-US=-70                                                     Slope=0.22                  ΔMEu-US=-173


                                           (e) + Average Tax Rate                                        (f) + Tax Structure (=full country-specific)
               1000 1100 1200 1300




                                                                                                           1000 1100 1200 1300




                                                                                     HU US                                                                                           US
                                                                                         CZ
                                                                                                                                                                               HU
                                                   IE                                                                                                        GR         NO               CZ
                                                                AT                                                                                          ATUK
                                                                  UK                                                                                                           SE
                                                                 BE         NO
               Model




                                                                                                           Model




                                                                                                                                                                              PL
                                                   DE
                                                                       FR                                                                NL IE                     FR                    PT
                                                                GR                   SE
                                                                                    PL         PT
                                                                                                                                                 ES
                        900




                                                                                                                    900




                                             NL
                                                                                          DK                                                                                        DK
                                            IT
                                                     ES                                                                                 IT
                                                                                                                                               DE            BE
                        800




                                                                                                                    800
                        700




                                                                                                                    700




                                     700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300                                                700     800        900   1000 1100 1200 1300
                                                              Data                                                                                        Data

                                                 CorrData,Model=0.28                                                                         CorrData,Model=0.43
                                                 Slope=0.17                  ΔMEu-US=-192           28                                       Slope=0.27                  ΔMEu-US=-188

Note: CorrData,Model refers to the cross-country correlation of model and data hours, and Slope to the slope of a regression line
of model predicted hours on data hours as depicted in the figure, both times excluding the US. DM   Eu US gives the average hours
difference in levels between Europe and the US in the model. In each panel of the figure, one additional model feature is set to the
country-specific level, namely the one indicated in the subheading.
slightly lower hours in Europe than in the US. However, the predicted hours in Ireland increase substantially,
and somewhat in a few other European countries, largely those with low average tax rates depicted in panel
(b) of Figure 3. Most importantly, hours in the Scandinavian countries and specifically in Denmark decrease
substantially. The high average tax rate is thus the main driver of the low predicted hours by Danish married
women. The slope of the regression line and the correlation both again decrease once the European average
tax rates are added as model inputs. Thus, adding the average tax rates only modestly helps in explaining
the average US-European hours difference, but not in explaining the variation of hours of married women
within Europe.
    Panel (f) finally adds the tax structure of the labor income tax code and presents the full country-specific
results, already shown in Panel (c) of Figure 4. Predicted hours in Europe slightly increase by 4 hours
compared to panel (e), i.e. on average the effect of the European tax structure goes in the wrong direction,
as seen before. However, the tax structure substantially helps improve the fit within Europe. The slope
increases by 0.10 (from 0.17 to 0.27), and the correlation by 0.15 (from 0.28 to 0.43). While these increases
are substantial, they are somewhat smaller than the ones in the individual decomposition (0.13 and 0.27,
respectively), in which wages and the educational composition are left at the US-level. Thus, there exist
interaction effects between wage premia and the educational composition on the one hand and the non-
linear labor income tax code on the other hand. Still, our results of the importance of the tax structure for
explaining the variation of married women’s hours worked in Europe are robust to different orderings of the
decomposition.30
    Imposing the country-specific tax structure improves the fit substantially for Germany, Sweden, Poland,
and Ireland. Specifically, for Germany the tax structure decreases hours substantially, while for Sweden the
opposite happens. As we discuss in our motivating example in the introduction, Germany is a country with
joint taxation, while Sweden features separate taxation. For Germany, the difference between the illustrative
average marginal tax rate for married women and the average tax rate for single earner households depicted
in panel (b) of Figure 3 is larger than in the US, indicating even stronger elements of joint taxation than in
the US.31 A few countries move however further away from the hours in the data at this step. Specifically,
one can see the positive effect of the tax structure on Greece and Spain, which makes it harder to predict
low hours in these two countries.
   30 The slope increases by 0.17 (0.08) and the correlation by 0.10 (0.12) if only the educational composition (only wages) are set

country-specific before the country-specific tax structures are imposed.
   31 The comparison of the model results to the illustrative tax measures in panel (b) of Figure 3 however also makes it clear

that the full tax code is much more complex than the two illustrative tax rates show. E.g. adding the Irish tax structure predicts
a substantial decrease in hours worked, despite a lower illustrative average marginal tax rate there than in the US which is even
slightly smaller than the average tax rate of the single-earner household, see panel (b) of Figure 3. The Irish tax system features
very strong progressivity, such that both tax rates and the difference between them rise rapidly with individual income (see also
Figure C.1 in the Online Appendix for one illustrative measure of progressivity).




                                                                29
6      The Two Margins of Labor Supply

6.1     Extensive and Intensive Margin in Data and Model
So far, we only discussed data and results for hours worked per person. For married women, however, we
model an extensive and an intensive margin, and we can thus compare the results for both margins to the
data. Figure 6 decomposes hours worked per married woman in the data into the extensive margin, i.e.
the employment rate, on the horizontal axis, and the intensive margin, i.e. hours worked per employed, on
the vertical axis. Figure 2 showed that Scandinavia and Eastern Europe both exhibit high hours worked of
married women. Figure 6, by contrast, documents stark differences between both regions for the extensive
and intensive margins: relative to the US, Scandinavia features high employment rates but low hours worked
per employed, while the decomposition into both margins for Eastern Europe resembles the one in the US.
Similarly, Southern Europe (with the exception of Portugal) and Western Europe both exhibit low hours
worked per married woman, but again are clearly distinguishable in the decomposition into the extensive
and intensive margin. Relative to the US, Western Europe features high employment rates and low hours
worked per employed, while Southern Europe has low employment rates, with hours worked per employed
being lower than in the US, but higher than in Western Europe. Portugal resembles the Eastern European
countries not only in its high level of hours worked of married women, but also in its decomposition into
both margins. The resulting cross-country correlation of hours worked per employed and employment rates
of married women in the data is negative with a value of -0.29. Low hours worked per employed married
woman in the data are largely driven by a high share of part-time working women, and vice versa. The
cross-country correlation between hours worked per employed woman and the share of women working less
than 30 hours is -0.9. We get back to the issue of part-time work in Section 6.2.32
      Table 5 shows the performance of the model in matching extensive and intensive margin differences
relative to the US. The first column shows employment rate differences relative to the US (in percentage
points) in the data and the model, while the second column shows hours worked per employed differences
(in %). On average, the model overpredicts the employment rate differences to the US, and underpredicts the
differences in hours worked per employed.33 As column 3 shows, the model features a positive correlation
of 0.32 between married women’s employment rates and hours worked per employed, while in the data the
correlation is -0.29. It is not entirely surprising that taxes, similarly to wages and the educational composi-
tion, have difficulties explaining the vastly different decompositions into the intensive and extensive margin
in Scandinavia and Western Europe on the one hand, and Eastern and Southern Europe and the US on the
other hand visible in Figure 6. The model factors affect both margins in the same direction, and thus the
predictions relative to the US are qualitatively similar across both margins, resulting in a positive correlation
between both margins.
    32 Figure B.7 in the Online Appendix shows the decomposition into both margins for married men.     There is little variation
in employment rates of married men, which lie always above 90%. The only exceptions are Hungary and Poland, where lower
employment rates are driven by older married men and are probably a phenomenon of the transition from Socialism to Capitalism.
   33 Online Appendix Figure C.4 shows the country-specific results for employment rates and hours worked per employed.


                                                              30
Figure 6: Average Employment Rates and Hours Worked per Employed of Married Women (Ages 25-54)




                                                  1800
                                                                                              HU
                                                                                              PL    US
                                                                                GR
                                                                                                         CZ
                                                                                                              PT




                                     Hours Worked per Employed
                                                         1600
                                                                           ES
                                                                                                                       DK




                                               1400
                                                                                                    BE FR               SE
                                                                           IT

                                                                                        IE               AT UK        NO


                                     1200
                                                                                                    DE
                                                  1000


                                                                                                         NL

                                                                 50              60         70        80                     90
                                                                                      Employment Rate

                                                                      US         East        Scand.       West         South



       Table 5: Married Women’s Employment Rate (ER) and Hours Worked per Employed (HWE)


                                                                        Eu.-US Gap
                                                                       ER      HWE                                 Corr. (ER, HWE)
                                Data                                   0.0                   17.2                       0.29
                                Model                                  7.5                    5.8                       0.32
Note: For the Europe-US gap in employment rates, we show percentage point differences, and for hours worked per employed %
differences.


6.2    Wedges and the Margins of Labor Supply
What can explain the negative correlation between employment rates and hours worked per employed by
married women in the data? Many institutional, policy, and regulatory factors other than those featured in
our model affect hours worked, and especially the decisions whether to work or not, and how many hours
to work conditional on working. In order to get some insights into which factors could generate a negative
correlation, we follow the approach pioneered by Chari et al. (2007), and introduce two country-specific
wedges into the model, t̂E and t̂h f , in order to match the country-specific female employment rates and
hours worked per employed. The wedges pick up any differences between the model’s predictions and data
that are not driven by taxes, wages, and the educational composition. They could potentially capture very
different factors, such as restrictions on hours or employment from the labor demand side, child care, or
maternal leave. Below we correlate these non-modeled factors with our wedges and explore which of them
may be particularly important for understanding the discrepancy between the model and the data in the
decomposition into both margins.

                                                                                             31
    The two wedges affect the household’s decision problem in the following form. Instead of Equation (2),
households maximize the following objective function, in which the wedges are added at the end:
                                ⇢
                                             1+ 1      1+ f1
                      max           ln c   ahm f    ah f        1{h f >0} q + 1{h f >0} t̂E + t̂h f · h f   (11)
                      hm ,h f

The wedge t̂E works as an implicit subsidy or tax on female employment. A positive t̂E increases the utility
of working for women, and therefore at least partly offsets the fixed costs of working q associated with
positive female hours worked. It only affects the extensive margin choice of married women. t̂h f , on the
other hand, represents an implicit subsidy or tax on female hours worked. It directly affects the intensive
margin choice by entering the first order condition for female hours conditional on working: a negative
t̂h f increases the disutility of work for every hour of work. Thereby, it also has an indirect effect on the
extensive margin choice, by changing the utility of working a certain amount of hours vis-à-vis the utility of
not working. We calibrate both wedges to match the country-specific employment rates and hours worked
per employed married woman.
    By construction, for countries for which the model predicts too high (low) hours or employment rates
relative to the data, the respective wedge is negative (positive). The larger the difference between the pre-
dictions of the model without wedges and the data, the larger is the absolute value of the calibrated wedge,
see Figure C.5 in the Online Appendix. Moreover, since the model predicts a positive correlation between
employment rates and hours worked per employed rather than the observed negative correlation, the wedges
are negatively correlated with a value of -0.71.

Correlation of Wedges with Country-Specific Factors

To understand which factors could drive the two margins in opposite directions, we follow the idea in Oha-
nian et al. (2008) and correlate the wedges with country-specific variables that are potentially important for
women’s labor supply choices and the decomposition into both margins. Table C.6 in the Online Appendix
shows the country-specific wedges, as well as the country-specific values of all variables that we correlate
with the wedges.
    The variable that features one of the strongest correlations with both wedges is an OECD country ranking
of part-time generosity. A higher part-time generosity rank implies more extensive rights of the worker to
demand part-time work, fewer grounds for refusal from part of the employer, the right to go back to full-
time work, as well as part-time legislation being in place for a longer time period. As Table 6 shows, the
OECD part-time generosity rank exhibits a positive correlation of 0.44 with the hours wedge, and a negative
correlation of -0.42 with the employment wedge. Part-time generosity also intuitively explains why both
margins could be negatively correlated in the data. Suppose that there exists a group of women who find it
optimal to work but to supply only relatively few hours. If part-time jobs are not available in a country, these
women might prefer not working over working full-time, resulting in a low average employment rate and
high average hours worked per employed. In a country with more generous rights to work part-time, these


                                                               32
                                 Table 6: Correlation of Wedges with Different Factors


                         Policies                                                           t̂h         t̂e
                         Part-time generosity rank                                         0.44        0.42
                         Annual leave + public holidays                                    0.27        0.40
                         Maternity leave: paid weeks                                       0.26        0.19
                         Avg. pay during maternity leave                                   0.12        0.02
                         Net child care costs (% of avg. earnings)                         0.33        0.05
                         Public child care expenditure (% of GDP)                          0.20        0.64
                         % of preschool child. in informal care                            0.02        0.43
                         Avg. hours of informal care for preschool child.                  0.40        0.38
                         Divorce rate (per 1000 persons per year)                          0.14        0.23
Note: This table shows correlation coefficients between the two wedges and different factors. Part-time generosity is the reverse of
the OECD part-time generosity rank, i.e. a higher rank implies higher generosity. Average pay during paid maternity leave is the
proportion of gross earnings replaced by the benefit over the length of the paid leave entitlement for a person with average earnings.
Net child care costs are child care costs minus benefits for two children aged 2 and 3 in full-time child care as % of the household
income for a couple in which both earn the average wage. Divorce rates are the number of divorced marriages per year per 1000
inhabitants. All data come from the OECD with the exception of annual leave and public holidays, which are taken from Bick et al.
(2017).


women will enter the work force at the desired low hours, thereby increasing average employment rates
and decreasing average hours worked per employed. To give a concrete example, the US, our benchmark
country, has the lowest OECD part-time generosity rank, while Sweden has the highest rank and has one of
the highest employment and hours wedges (in absolute values). Thus, the differential regulation of part-time
work across countries is a promising feature that could potentially explain the negative correlation of hours
worked per employed and employment rates that we see in the data.
    Table 6 also shows correlations of both wedges with other potential driving forces, namely the number of
vacation days and public holidays, maternity leave policies (weeks of maternity leave, and pay replacement
rates during the leave), child care variables (net child care cost, public child care expenditure over GDP,
percent of preschool children in informal care, and hours of informal care conditional on receiving informal
care), and divorce rates. The number of vacation days and public holidays exhibit a positive correlation with
the employment wedge and a negative one with the hours wedge, indicating that more generous vacation
time might induce more women to start working at lower annual hours worked. Thus, it works similarly
to part-time generosity, but the correlation with the hours wedge is less strong. The correlations of both
wedges with leave policies are generally low. Surprisingly, the correlation of child care costs with the
employment wedge is small, and with the hours wedge of the opposite sign than one would expect. This
finding is especially surprising in light of the substantial evidence in the literature that child care matters
for female labor supply.34 It could stem from the difficulties of constructing a comparable and appropriate
  34 Relying on quantitative models calibrated to one single country, namely Germany or the US, respectively, Domeij and Klein

(2013) and Guner et al. (2016) find that subsidizing child care is an effective policy if the government wants to increase female
labor supply. Guner et al. (2016) additionally show that child care subsidies increase female employment rates, but decrease female

                                                                 33
measure of child care costs for all countries. In fact, the correlation of the employment wedge with public
child care expenditure over GDP is high, and both correlations go in the expected direction. It might be
the case that the measure of public child care expenditure is of better quality than the measure of net child
care cost to the household. Additionally, public child care expenditure might capture substantial variation
in quality or availability of slots across countries, which are not captured by a measure of net child care
cost. Moreover, informal child care arrangements also play an important role in practice. According to the
OECD, on average across our sample countries 28% of preschool children receive some form of informal
child care, with the average hours conditional on receiving this form of child care being 15. Informal
child care is strongly negatively correlated with public expenditures on child care.35 This suggests that
private arrangements serve at least to some degree as substitutes for government child care policies, see e.g.
Bick (2016) for the case of Germany. Last, we correlate the wedges with divorce rates, as suggested by
Chakraborty et al. (2015), but correlations are low. Measuring and modeling part-time regulation or child
care policies across countries is far from trivial, and we abstain from doing it in this paper.

Decomposition With and Without Wedges

One might be worried that the effects of taxes on hours worked would be different if both margins of labor
supply were matched perfectly across countries, i.e. in the model with wedges. To address these concerns,
we repeat the decomposition exercise in the model with country-specific wedges. In this model, we take the
US environment with country-specific wedges as the benchmark, and then set either the consumption tax
rate or the labor income tax rate country-specific and compare hours in the two cases. The incentive effects
of the two taxes and the other model components are quite similar in the models with or without wedges,
both qualitatively and quantitatively, see Online Appendix Table C.7.


7     Conclusion
Relying on three micro data sets, we document average hours worked of married couples for a sample of
17 European countries and the US over the time period 2001 to 2008. We find that hours worked vary
significantly across countries, and substantially more for married women than for married men. Moreover,
a striking feature of the data is that the cross-country correlation between hours worked of married men and
married women is very low.
    We investigate in how far international differences in consumption taxes and labor income tax systems
can quantitatively account for the international differences in hours worked by married couples. We do this
in the context of a static model of joint labor supply, calibrated to the US and holding preferences constant
across countries. In addition to labor income and consumption taxes, we let gender and education wage
hours worked. Last, Attanasio et al. (2008) find that the reduction in child care costs in the US over time helps in explaining the
increase in labor supply of mothers.
  35 This correlation with public expenditures on child care is -0.65 for the fraction of children receiving informal care, and -0.41

for average hours in informal care.

                                                                34
premia, as well as the educational composition and matching into couples, vary across countries. These
model features can account for 58% of the US-Europe gap in male hours worked, and 88% of the US-
Europe gap in female hours worked, and also replicate the cross-country variation within Europe well: the
cross-country correlation between hours worked in the model and the data is 0.43 for both men and women.
Most importantly, the model generates a low correlation of hours worked of married men and women.
    Differences in consumption taxes are the main driving force of the average hours worked difference
between Europe and the US for married women. The key to the success of the model in explaining the
substantial within-Europe variation in married women’s hours worked, and in breaking the cross-country
correlation of married men’s and women’s labor supply, is the explicit modeling of non-linearities in the
labor income tax code. The tax treatment of married couples, which ranges across countries from separate
to different degrees of joint taxation, interacts with the progressivity of the tax system in affecting labor
supply decisions of both spouses differently across countries. Differences in the educational composition
across countries further help in explaining low female hours worked in Southern and Western Europe. For
married men, labor income taxes are the main driver of low European hours worked, aided by consumption
taxes.
    While the results leave scope for other factors explaining hours worked of married women (e.g., a
home production sector in competition with the service sector of the economy, income risk, or a life-cycle
component, which could be especially helpful to capture both margins of labor supply), labor income and
consumption taxes, together with wages and the educational composition, have large explanatory power for
international differences in hours worked of married women through the lens of the model. It is however
crucial to model non-linear labor income tax systems in order to replicate the behavior of married women.
The origins of the different decomposition of married women’s hours worked into the extensive and the
intensive margin across countries remain as an open question for future research.




                                                     35
References
A LBANESI , S. AND C. O LIVETTI (2009): “Home Production, Market Production, and the Gender Wage
  Gap: Incentives and Expectations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 12, 80–107.

——— (2015): “Gender Roles and Medical Progress,” Journal of Political Economy.

A LESINA , A., E. G LAESER , AND B. S ACERDOTE (2005): “Work and Leisure in the United States and
  Europe: Why So Different?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 20, 1–64.

A LONSO -O RTIZ , J. (2014): “Social Security and Retirement Across the OECD,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics & Control, 47, 300–316.

ATTANASIO , O., H. L OW, AND V. S ANCHEZ -M ARCOS (2008): “Explaining Changes in Female Labor
  Supply in a Life-Cycle Model,” American Economic Review, 98, 1517–1542.

BAR , M. AND O. L EUKHINA (2009): “To Work or Not to Work: Did Tax Reforms Affect Labor Force
 Participation of Married Couples?” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 9.

B ENABOU , R. (2002): “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What Levels of
  Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?” Econometrica, 70, 481–517.

B ICK , A. (2016): “The Quantitative Role of Child Care for Female Labor Force Participation and Fertility,”
   Journal of the European Association, 14, 639–668.

B ICK , A., B. B R ÜGGEMANN , AND N. F UCHS -S CH ÜNDELN (2017): “Hours Worked in Europe and the
   US: New Data, New Answers,” Working Paper.

B ICK , A. AND N. F UCHS -S CH ÜNDELN (2017): “Quantifying the Disincentive Effects of Joint Taxation on
   Married Women’s Labor Supply,” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 107, 100–104.

B LUNDELL , R. AND T. M AC URDY (1999): “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches,” in
  Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier Science B.V., chap. 27,
  1559–1695.

B RIDGMAN , B., G. D UERNECKER , AND B. H ERRENDORF (2017): “Structural Transformation, Marketi-
  zation, and Household Production Around the World,” Working Paper.

B UERA , F. J., J. P. K ABOSKI , AND M. Q. Z HAO (2014): “The Rise of Services: the Role of Skills, Scale,
  and Female Labor Supply,” Working Paper.

C HADE , H. AND G. V ENTURA (2002): “Taxes and Marriage: A Two-Sided Search Analysis,” International
  Economic Review, 43, 955–986.

——— (2005): “Income Taxation and Marital Decisions,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 565–599.

C HAKRABORTY, I., H. A. H OLTER , AND S. S TEPANCHUK (2015): “Marriage Stability, Taxation and
  Aggregate Labor Supply in the US vs. Europe,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 72, 1–20.

C HARI , V. V., P. J. K EHOE , AND E. R. M C G RATTAN (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,” Economet-
  rica, 75, 781–836.

                                                    36
C ROSSLEY, T. AND S.-H. J EON (2007): “Joint Taxation and the Labour Supply of Married Women: Evi-
  dence from the Canadian Tax Reform of 1988,” Fiscal Studies, 28, 343–365.

D ÍAZ -G IM ÉNEZ , J., A. G LOVER , AND J.-V. R ÍOS -RULL (2011): “Facts on the Distributions of Earnings,
   Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 Update,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
   Review, 34.

D OMEIJ , D. AND M. F LOD ÉN (2006): “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Constraints: Why
  Estimates are Biased,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 242–262.

D OMEIJ , D. AND P. K LEIN (2013): “Should Day Care Be Subsidized?” Review of Economic Studies, 80,
  568–595.

D UERNECKER , G. AND B. H ERRENDORF (2016): “On the Allocation of Time - A Quantitative Analysis
  of the US and France,” Working Paper.

E ISSA , N. O. (1995): “Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Women: The Tax Reform Act of 1986 as a
   Natural Experiment,” NBER Working Paper No. 5023.

——— (1996): “Labor Supply and the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981,” in Empirical Foundations of
 Household Taxation, ed. by M. Feldstein and J. Poterba, NBER Conference Volume.

E ROSA , A., L. F USTER , AND G. K AMBOUROV (2012): “Labor Supply and Government Programs: A
   Cross-Country Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 84–107.

G REENWOOD , J., A. S ESHADRI , AND M. YORUKOGLU (2005): “Engines of Liberation,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 72, 109–133.

G UNER , N., R. K AYGUSUZ , AND G. V ENTURA (2012a): “Taxation and Household Labor Supply,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 79, 1113–1149.

——— (2012b): “Taxing Women: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 111–
 128.

——— (2016): “Child-Related Transfers, Household Labor Supply and Welfare,” Working Paper.

G UVENEN , F., B. K URUSCU , AND S. O ZKAN (2014): “Taxation of Human Capital and Wage Inequality:
  A Cross-Country Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 81, 818–850.

J ONES , L. E., R. E. M ANUELLI , AND E. R. M C G RATTAN (2014): “Why Are Married Women Working
   So Much?” Journal of Demographic Economics, 81, 75–114.

K AYGUSUZ , R. (2010): “Taxes and Female Labor Supply,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13, 725–741.

K EANE , M. P. (2011): “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49, 961–
  1075.

K NOWLES , J. (2013): “Why are Married Men Working so Much? An Aggregate Analysis of Intra-
  Household Bargaining and Labour Supply,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 1055–1085.

M C DANIEL , C. (2011): “Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004,” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 27–52.
                                                     37
——— (2012): “Average Tax Rates on Consumption, Investment, Labor and Capital in the OECD 1950-
 2003,” Working Paper.

M ULLIGAN , C. B. AND Y. RUBINSTEIN (2008): “Selection, Investment, and Women’s Relative Wages
  over Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1061–1110.

N GAI , L. R. AND B. P ETRONGOLO (2017): “Gender Gaps and the Rise of the Service Economy,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Forthcoming.

N GAI , L. R. AND C. A. P ISSARIDES (2011): “Taxes, Social Subsidies, and the Allocation of Work Time,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1–26.

O HANIAN , L., A. R AFFO , AND R. ROGERSON (2008): “Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply and Taxes:
  Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 1353–1362.

O LIVETTI , C. (2006): “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Role of Returns to Experience,”
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 557–587.

O LIVETTI , C. AND B. P ETRONGOLO (2008): “Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A Cross-Country
  Analysis of Gender Gaps,” Journal of Labor Economics, 26, 621–654.

P RESCOTT, E. C. (2004): “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?” Federal Reserve
   Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28, 2–13.

R AGAN , K. (2013): “Taxes, Transfers and Time Use: Fiscal Policy in a Household Production Model,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 168–192.

R ENDALL , M. (2015): “Female Market Work, Tax Regimes, and the Rise of the Service Sector,” Working
  Paper.

ROGERSON , R. (2006): “Understanding Differences in Hours Worked,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9,
 365–409.

——— (2007): “Taxation and Market Work: Is Scandinavia an Outlier?” Economic Theory, 32, 59–85.

——— (2008): “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor Market Outcomes,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 116, 235–259.

——— (2009): “Market Work, Home Work, and Taxes: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Review of Interna-
 tional Economics, 17, 588–601.

WALLENIUS , J. (2013): “Social Security and Cross-Country Differences in Hours: A General Equilibrium
 Analysis,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37, 2466–2482.




                                                  38
A    Appendix: Applying Tax Codes from Different Countries
The third row (tl ) of Table 4 shows the model predicted hours if the labor income tax system is set country-
specific, while gross household income yhh in Equation (4) remains at the US level, i.e.

                                       yhh = wUS         US
                                              m (z)hm + w f (x)h f .                                   (A.1)

Progressive tax systems are in some way defined relative to the income level in a country. For example,
the US mean wage (w̄US ) is around four times higher than the mean wage in Hungary (which has the low-
est wage). Simply applying the Hungarian tax system one to one to the US would imply that the average
household would end up in a range of the tax code featuring a much higher tax rate than the average Hun-
garian household. We account for this in the following way. First, for each combination of husband-wife
hours choices, we calculate the tax rate in country i using the US gender-specific education premia and the
country-specific mean wage (w̄i ). Second, we apply this tax rate to the US gross earnings implied by the
same husband-wife hours choices to obtain the household’s income tax liability tl , and set Equation (5)
equal to:                                           ✓                                 ◆
                                                        wUS
                                                         m (z) i
                                                                      wUS
                                                                        f (x) i
                                              tli        w̄US w̄ hm ,  w̄US
                                                                             w̄ h f
                                   tl = yhh                               US                           (A.2)
                                                    wUS
                                                     m (z) i
                                                                 w (x)
                                                     w̄US
                                                          w̄ hm + w̄f US w̄i h f
in the household optimization problem.
    We proceed in a similar fashion when we analyze the effects of country-specific gender-education premia
in row 6 of Table 4. Household income in Equation (4) in this case is replaced by

                                                        w f (x) US    i
                                         wi (z)
                                    yhh = m i w̄US hm +        w̄ h f ,                                (A.3)
                                          w̄             w̄i

and the household’s income tax liability in Equation (5) by
                                                                           !
                                               wim (z) US     wif (x) US
                                 tl = tlUS            w̄ hm ,        w̄ h f .                          (A.4)
                                                 w̄i           w̄i

Thus, the mean wage remains unchanged, but only the gender-education premia are set country-specific.




                                                             39
