           Working Paper Series



           A Quantitative Theory of the Gender Gap
           in Wages




                                                    WP 05-09   Andrés Erosa
                                                               University of Toronto

                                                               Luisa Fuster
                                                               University of Toronto

                                                               Diego Restuccia
                                                               Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
                                                               University of Toronto




This paper can be downloaded without charge from:
http://www.richmondfed.org/publications/
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond − Working Paper 05-09

A Quantitative Theory of the
Gender Gap in Wages†
Andrés Erosa
University of Toronto

Luisa Fuster
University of Toronto

Diego Restuccia
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and University of Toronto

September 2005
Abstract
Using panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), we document that
gender differences in wages almost double during the first 20 years of labor market experience
and that there are substantial gender differences in employment and hours of work during
the life cycle. A large portion of gender differences in labor market attachment can be traced
to the impact of children on the labor supply of women. We develop a quantitative life-cycle
model of fertility, labor supply, and human capital accumulation decisions. We use this
model to assess the role of fertility on gender differences in labor supply and wages over the
life cycle. In our model, fertility lowers the lifetime intensity of market activity, reducing
the incentives for human capital accumulation and wage growth over the life cycle of females
relative to males. We calibrate the model to panel data of men and to fertility and child
related labor market histories of women. We find that fertility accounts for most of the
gender differences in labor supply and wages during the life cycle documented in the NLSY
data.


Keywords: Gender wage gap, employment, experience, fertility, human capital.
JEL Classification: J2,J3.
†
 We are grateful to Ig Horstmann and Richard Rogerson for comments and suggestions. We also thank the
comments of Aloysius Siow, Marcelo Veracierto, and seminar participants at the 2004 SED in Florence, Ari-
zona State University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 2005 NBER Summer Institute, the University
of Guelph, the University of Pittsburgh, the University of Southern California, the University of Western
Ontario, Stanford University (SITE workshop). We thank Christine Neill for invaluable research assistance.
All remaining errors are our own. We acknowledge the financial support of the BBVA foundation. Fuster ac-
knowledges the financial support from the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia of Spain (grant SEJ2004-03149).
Restuccia acknowledges the support from the Institute for Policy Analysis at the University of Toronto and
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or
the Federal Reserve System.Contact Information: andres.erosa@utoronto.ca; luisa.fuster@utoronto.ca; and
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca.



                                                     1
1     Introduction

A striking but well known feature of the U.S. labor market is that the average hourly wage

of women is much lower than that of men. Less known is the fact that the gender gap in

wages grows over the life cycle. These gender differences in wages over the life cycle are

accompanied by substantial gender differences in labor supply, mostly due to the impact of

children on the labor supply of women.

    The goal of this paper is to build a quantitative theory of fertility, labor supply, and

human capital accumulation decisions in order to understand the wage and labor supply of

women over the life-cycle and why they differ from those of men. We develop a decision-

theoretic framework in which individuals decide how much effort to exert in accumulating

human capital on the job and whether to work or to stay at home. Females make fertility

decisions which negatively affect their labor supply. While it is clear that any theory of

gender differences needs to introduce some differences between male and females, there are

many ways one could introduce gender differences. Our approach is to assume that the

bearing and presence of children involves a forced reduction in hours of work that falls on

females rather than on males. We then use our theory to assess the role of children in

understanding gender differences in labor supply and wages over the life cycle.

    Our paper is motivated by some basic insights from human capital theory as well as by

some observations regarding the labor supply of women. The theories developed by Becker

(1967) and Ben-Porath (1967) stress the importance of modeling human capital and labor

supply decisions jointly in a life-cycle framework. Two crucial insights from these seminal




                                             2
papers are that the incentives to accumulate human capital vary along the life cycle and that

these incentives are directly proportional to the time one expects to work over the lifetime.

The idea that women may face different incentives to accumulate human capital than men

due to a higher relative value of non-market activities can be traced back to the influential

work of Mincer and Polachek (1974). These authors provide evidence that married women

tend to interrupt their labor market attachment with periods of non-participation and, using

a regression framework, they find that expected career interruptions do have an impact on

the human capital investments of young women. While intuitively appealing, the insights of

Mincer and Polachek have not been formally modeled in a decision-theoretic framework. In

fact, Killingsworth and Heckman (1986) in their survey on female labor supply, refer to the

work of Mincer and Polachek as the “informal theory”. One way of viewing our contribution

is to provide an explicit model of the “informal theory” and to evaluate its quantitative

importance for understanding the wages and the labor supply of women over the life cycle.

      We use panel data − the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

(NLSY79) − to document observations characterizing the labor market behavior of a recent

cohort of young men and women. Our starting point is that there are substantial gender

differences in labor supply and that these differences are closely related to the impact of

children on the labor supply of women. We document that the average number of hours of

work per person is about 40% larger for men than for women between the ages of 20 and 40.

By age 40, this difference in hours of work translates into a stock of accumulated experience

that is about 50% larger for men than for women.1 We also find that the primary factor

  1
      We emphasize that gender differences in cumulative hours of work are much larger than the ones obtained



                                                      3
in understanding gender differences in labor supply is given by children. In particular, once

we condition by the number of children, marriage is not crucial for understanding the low

working hours of women. Human capital theory implies that gender differences in hours

of work should translate into different incentives for human capital accumulation across

genders. The data lends supports to the importance of human capital accumulation as a

determinant of wages since there is substantial wage growth during the first 20 years of labor

market experience − wages of men more than double between age 20 and age 40. Moreover,

our data suggest that differential human capital accumulation can be a source of gender

differences in wages since the life cycle wage growth of women is lower than that of men.

We document that the gender gap in wages almost doubles from age 20 to age 40 − from

about 18 percentage points at age 20 to 32 percentage points at age 40. This increase in

the gender gap in wages over the life cycle occurs despite substantial convergence in average

wages between men and women during the period (see Blau and Khan, 2000).

    We emphasize the importance of modeling human capital accumulation in a life cycle

framework (with a realistic life span). This approach allows us to better compare the statis-

tics of our model with the data, which is of first-order importance in quantitative theory.

Moreover, theory suggests that the incentives to accumulate human capital are driven by

the life-cycle profile of working hours, not just by the average amount of hours worked. In

particular, to the extent that young females may not know the exact path of future labor

supply, investment in human capital depends on expected lifetime labor supply. The un-

by focusing on years of employment, which is the measure of experience typically used in empirical studies.
Moreover, we find large gender differences in hours of work, even among full-time workers. This illustrates
an advantage of the NLSY, relative to other data sources such as CPS or PSID, in providing week-by-week
data on hours of work.


                                                    4
certainty associated with future fertility implies gender differences in labor supply, human

capital accumulation, and wages over the life cycle even among males and females with sim-

ilar (ex-post) age-profiles of employment. The question that we answer in this paper is how

much.

   We calibrate the model to panel data of men and to fertility and child-related labor

market histories of women. Our quantitative theory is successful in matching our calibration

targets. In particular, our theory matches the age-profile of employment and the age-profile

of hours of work for men. We use panel data of men, regarding wages and labor supply, to

calibrate the human capital technology. We assume that there are no gender differences in

the human capital technology and we use our quantitative theory to measure human capital

accumulation by females over the life cycle. Regarding females, our model replicates the birth

rates by age and the impact of children on career interruptions and labor supply. We find

that fertility generates gender differences in employment and hours that lead to differential

returns to experience across genders and a wage gap that increases with age. Our theory

implies that the gender wage gap grows 21 percentage points between ages 20 and 40, a

figure that is actually larger than the one in the data (in Section 5 we discuss what may

explain this result). We find that (at least) 40% of the increase in the gender gap in wages

between ages 20 and 40 is due to the impact of children on the labor supply of females and

that our theory implies a gap in wages between mothers and non-mothers that is consistent

with the data. Children have a large negative effect on wages of females because they reduce

the labor supply at a stage of the life cycle when the returns to human capital accumulation

on the job are high.


                                              5
   Our theory emphasizes the importance of future labor supply as opposed to actual expe-

rience for human capital accumulation. Our findings are consistent with the vast empirical

literature that finds a substantial gender residual in wage regressions that measure human

capital investments by past experience. To illustrate this point, in one experiment we simu-

late males and females in our model that are identical in terms of initial human capital and

lifetime employment. Our simulated males and females only differ in lifetime labor supply

because females work 10% less hours than males and because females expect to have chil-

dren −with the associated negative impact on labor supply− even though ex-post no female

is ever given an opportunity to have children. As a result, we simulate females that are

identical to males at age 20 and have identical age-profile of employment over the life cycle.

Since females in this experiment work more than 35 hours a week, we follow the empirical

literature in counting them as full-time employed. We find that the gender wage ratio in this

experiment is exactly 1 at age 20 and despite no differences in lifetime full-time employment,

at age 40, females earn on average a wage that is 9 percentage points lower than the average

wage of males. Using this simulated data, a standard wage regression of log wages on experi-

ence (measured as full-time employment) and a sex dummy as explanatory variables, would

attribute a negative wage effect to being a female worker and a lower return to (measured)

experience by females relative to males. This experiment shows that even females that are

highly attached to the labor market face weaker incentives to invest in human capital than

males that can generate sizeable gender wage gaps. We conclude that, in the context of our

framework, standard statistical decomposition analysis of the gender gap in wages produces

misleading results.


                                              6
      There is a recent literature using quantitative theory to explain the decrease in the gender

gap in wages during the last 25 years in the U.S. labor market (see Olivetti, 2001 and Jones,

Manuelli, and McGrattan, 2003). While our theory can be used to analyze recent time trends,

our focus in this paper is on the level of the gender gap in wages for a recent cohort of young

men and women and the impact of children in gender differences in labor supply and wages.

Bowlus (1997) estimates a search model in order to assess the role of gender differences in

expected labor market turnover for understanding the gender wage gap, an exercise that

is similar in spirit to ours. A distinguishing feature of our approach, relative to previous

papers in the literature, is that we use a life-cycle model with a realistic lifespan. As a

result, we can use detail panel data to parameterize the human capital technology. Huggett,

Ventura, and Yaron (2004) is the paper closest to ours in terms of methodology since they

also use panel data to restrict the human capital technology in a life-cycle model. Our paper

differs from theirs in that we focus on gender differences in wages. Moreover, in our theory

actual labor market experience is not a sufficient statistic for human capital growth since,

due to unobserved effort, returns to experience are endogenous. Imai and Keane (2004)

estimate a dynamic life-cycle model of human capital accumulation but their interest is in

estimating the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution of labor supply rather than the gender

differences in wages. Attanasio, Low, and Sánchez-Marcos (2004) and Greenwood, Seshardi,

and Yorukoglu (2005) focus on understanding time trends in female labor supply. Da Rocha

and Fuster (2004) use quantitative theory to investigate recent cross-country observations

on fertility and female labor market participation rates.2

  2
      More generally, our paper follows a recent tradition in quantitative theory on the economics of the family



                                                        7
    Our paper also relates to the literature on wage differences between mothers and non-

mothers (see for instance Anderson, Binder, and Krause, 2002 and Waldfogel, 1998). Em-

pirical studies in this literature emphasize the importance of children on work interruptions

of women through destruction of firm-specific skills and good quality job matches. Erosa,

Fuster, and Restuccia (2001, 2002) argue that these features can account for only about 10

to 20% of the family gap in wages. Differently than the large wage losses associated with

layoffs, the negative impact of career interruptions due to childbirth on wages is limited by

the endogeneity of career-interruption decisions. Instead, in our model the family gap in

wages arises because children generate career interruptions at a stage of the life cycle where

substantial investment in human capital occurs.

    The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we discuss the main features of

the NLSY79 data for men and women. In section 3, we describe the economic environment

and in section 4, we discuss the calibration. In section 5, we present the main quantitative

results and in the last section we conclude.




2     Data

We use a panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) to document

observations characterizing the behavior of a recent cohort of young men and women in the

labor market. We emphasize three observations from these data. First, gender differences in

wages grow substantially over the life cycle. Second, on average men work much more over

initiated by Aiyagari, Greenwood, and Guner (2000) and Regalia and Rı́os-Rull (1998).




                                                   8
the early part of the life cycle than women. Third, the origin of the gender differences in

labor supply can be traced to the impact of children in labor market decisions of women. In

what follows we document these observations in detail.


Description of the Data The NLSY79 is a panel data of a cohort of individuals that

in 1979, the time of the first interview, were between 14 and 21 years of age. By the year

2000, people in our sample are between 36 to 43 years of age and therefore have rich histories

of fertility and employment that are the focus of our analysis. In particular, the NLSY79

documents labor market histories of people for every week in the sample, allowing us to

study the impact of children on labor market decisions of women.


Gender Differences in Wages A salient feature of the labor market is that the average

hourly wage of women is substantially lower than the average wage of men. In our sample of

the NLSY79, the average wage ratio between women and men is 0.78. Although wages grow

substantially over the life cycle for both men and women, the gender wage ratio decreases

over the life cycle −the gender gap in wages increases with age. Figure 1 documents the

increase in the average wage over the life cycle for both men and women. Whereas the

average wage of men increases by a factor of 2.1 over the span of 20 years (from age 20 to

age 40), the average wage of women increases by a factor of 1.7: The difference in wage

growth is in average a one percentage point per year during this time span. The implication

of this differential wage growth over the life cycle is that the gender wage ratio decreases

from 0.82 at age 20 to 0.68 at age 40. In other words, the gender gap in wages increases




                                              9
by 14 percentage points over the early part of the life cycle. (See Figure 2.)3 Notice also

that there is a substantial gender gap in wages near the entry to the labor market, a gender

gap in wages of about 18 percentage points. The evidence of wage growth over the life cycle

points to the importance of investment in human capital: In average men more than double

their wage in 20 years. This is relevant for understanding the gender gap in wages (and its

growth over the life cycle) because the returns to human capital investment depend on the

dedication of time to the labor market in the future. If men and women differ with respect to

their actual or expected attachment to the labor market, their incentives to invest in human

capital would differ as well. Therefore, in order to understand the gender gap in wages, it is

essential to document the gender differences in labor supply between men and women and

their origins.


Employment and Hours Men work in average 40% more hours than women (37.6 vs.

26.7 hours per person per week, see Table 1). About 50% of this gender difference in hours of

work is accounted for by the gender difference in hours per-worker (intensive margin) while

the remaining part is accounted for by the gender difference in the employment to population

ratio (extensive margin).4

   3
     The increase of the gender gap in wages over the life cycle is even larger for highly educated people in
narrowly defined occupations. For instance, Wood, Corcoran, and Courant (1993) document wage differences
between male and female graduates of the University of Michigan Law School. While the gender differences
in earnings in the first year after graduation are almost negligible, the average hourly wage ratio between
these men and women is 0.67 after 15 years of graduation. Moreover, O’Neill (2003) documents that men
and women in the NLSY79 data are roughly similar in standard measures of education and qualification test
scores.
   4
     Hours per person can be decomposed into hours per worker and the employment to population ratio:
                                                          µ         ¶
                                        H     H W               W
                                           =     ·   +0· 1−           ,
                                        P     W P                P




                                                     10
                           Table 1: Average Hours and Employment

                                                           Men            Women
                                                                   All     No Child†
                  Hours per person (week)                  37.6    26.7      33.9
                  Hours per worker (week)                  45.9    38.7      41.3
                  Employment to population ratio           0.82    0.69      0.82

                People 20 to 43 years of age. † No Child refers to women with no children
                (until the last observation in our sample, when women are between 36
                to 43 years of age).



   Figures 3 and 4 document the life-cycle path of average hours per-worker and the em-

ployment to population ratio for men and women. Hours per worker and the employment

to population ratio increase with age for both men and women, but employment is more

prevalent for men than for women at every age group. While the employment to popula-

tion ratio is about 5 percentage points higher for men than for women at age 20, by age

40 this difference is 12 percentage points. There is also a substantial gap in hours of work

among people working: At age 20, employed men spend 6 hours more working per week than

women. At age 40 the difference in hours of work is 8 hours per week.

   An alternative way of characterizing differences in hours and employment between men

and women is by looking at the overall distribution of hours of work. Table 2 documents

the distribution of hours of work for men and women: Employment and jobs associated with

more than 40 hours of work per week are more prevalent among men than among women.

where H is aggregate labor hours, P is working-age population, and W is number of people employed. In
average, men work 40% more hours than women, while among those working, men work almost 20% more
hours than women.




                                                   11
                                 Table 2: Distribution of Hours (%)

                                                   Men          Women
                             Hours per week:               All No Child†
                               Zero                17.6    30.6    17.8
                               1-39                10.0    23.3    21.1
                               40                  33.5    29.4    35.2
                               >40                 39.0    16.7    25.9

                            People 20 to 43 years of age. † No Child refers to
                            women with no children (until the last observation
                            in our sample, when women are between 36 to 43
                            years of age).



Characteristics of Non-Employment Spells Employment is more prevalent among

men than women over the life cycle, but both men and women face spells of non-employment

and therefore it is of interest to characterize the gender differences in the spells of non-

employment. Even though the average number of non-employment spells and its distribution

are similar between men and women, the duration of non-employment spells differs across

genders: A non-employment spell lasts in average 41 weeks for men and 65 weeks for women

− on average non-employment spells last six months longer for women than for men.5 Com-

pared to men, non-employment spells of women are more concentrated among spells of long

duration: 27% of the non-employment spells of women last more than a year. (See Table 3.)


The Accumulation of Experience Women are characterized by lower employment,

fewer hours of work, and longer duration of non-employment spells than men. These gen-

   5
     The NLSY79 data follows a cohort of young people, therefore, average duration and number of spells are
not comparable to averages of other samples that include older workers. We restrict our sample to include
histories of people that at the start of any spell is 20 years of age or older and we abstract from spells of
short duration (6 weeks or less).




                                                     12
                          Table 3: Duration of Non-Employment Spells

                                             Men     Women                Women
                                                                 No childbirth Childbirth†
           Average (weeks)                    41          65          44           104
           Distribution (%):
             1 quarter (7-19)                 48          41            46               23
             2 quarters (20-32)               18          15            17               10
             3 quarters (33-45)               12          10            11               9
             4 quarters (46-58)                6           7             7                7
             More than a year (>58)           16          27            19               51

           Excludes non-employment spells of short duration (6 weeks or less). † Childbirth refers
           to non-employment spells that involve the birth of a child at the start or during the
           spell. About 82% of all non-employment spells involve “no childbirth” for women,
           15% involve the birth of one child and 3% involve the birth of two or more children.



der differences in labor supply imply that on average, women accumulate less experience

in the labor market than men. Table 4 documents the average accumulated experience for

men and women at age 40 in our panel data, for two measures of experience: Accumulated

weeks of work and accumulated weekly hours of work.6 Table 4 indicates that by age 40,

men have accumulated 24% more weeks of experience than women, and 48% more hours of

work than women. These differences in experience are substantial: Women would require a

much higher return to experience in order to exert the same effort in accumulating human

capital than men. Moreover, the differences in experience reported in Table 4 are substantial

even if compared with commonly used measures of experience such as potential experience

(age-years of schooling-6) or actual experience (accumulated years of employment).

  6
    There are some cases of people that are employed but report either zero hours or there are no hours
reported. The numbers presented in Table 4 assume these cases as zero hours, but alternative assumptions
yield similar results.




                                                     13
                      Table 4: Accumulated Experience at Age 40 (years)

                                                    Weeks Hours†
                                 Men (M)             18.6  20.9
                                 Women (W)           15.0  14.1
                                 Ratio M/W           1.24  1.48
                                 Women:
                                   No Children         17.8    18.3
                                   Children            14.4    13.3
                             †
                              Refers to equivalent years corresponding to
                             52 weeks and 40 hours of work per week.



Children and Labor Market Outcomes Labor supply differences across gender are

substantial. What is striking in comparing labor market outcomes of men and women is

the role that children play in labor supply decisions of women. We compare statistics for

the average of all women and for the average of women that never had children.7 The

employment to population ratio of women with no children is almost identical to that of

men during the life cycle as documented in Figure 3. The pattern of average hours per

worker is also similar between men and women with no children except for a constant gap

(roughly 6 hours per worker per week or about 10% of the hours per worker of males). This

pattern of hours of work for women with no children is reported in Figure 4. Comparing the

distribution of hours of work between men and women without children reveals the same

pattern reported in Figures 3 and 4 for men and women over the life cycle: Employment is

as prevalent for women without children as for men, but women with no children tend to

work less hours per week than men.

  7
    For the last observation of every woman in our sample − when they are between 36 to 43 years of age
− we consider women who had not had children up to that point and we refer to them as women with no
children (Women NoKever in the graphs).



                                                  14
   Children have lasting effects on employment and hours of women. Table 5 decomposes

hours per person, hours per worker, and the employment to population ratio for men and for

women differing by the number of children and by the age of their children. Differences in

employment to population ratios across women are striking: While women with no children

under 18 years of age have an average employment to population ratio similar to the average

of males (81.2% vs. 82.6%), women with one child under 18 years of age or more have

employment to population ratios below 65%. The employment ratio of women with young

children (less than a year old) is less than 50%. As documented earlier, men work 40%

more hours than women. Part of the difference in average hours comes from the effect of

children on labor supply of women: Average hours worked per person for women decline

with the number of children, specially for women with children less than 6 years of age and

average hours is specially low for women with young children (less than a year old). In

average, children reduce hours per worker of women in about 4% per child. Labor hours

differ substantially by the age of the child, although differences in hours per worker are not

as marked as employment for women with young children compared with men. In particular,

70% of the difference in hours per person between men and women with young children is

accounted for by the difference in the employment to population ratio while the remaining

30% is accounted for by the difference in hours per worker.

   Children have an important impact in the duration of non-employment spells of women

(see Table 3). We divide all non-employment spells of women between spells that involve the

birth of a child at the time or during the job separation (we call these spells “Childbirth”) and

spells that do not involve the birth of a child (“No Childbirth”). An important fraction of


                                               15
                             Table 5: Average Hours and Employment

                                      Hours/Person Hours/Worker Employment Ratio
         Men                              37.6         45.6           82.6
         Women                            26.7         38.5           69.5
         Women by Number
         of Children under 6:
            0                              31.1                39.6                   78.3
            1                              21.7                36.3                   59.5
            2                              16.0                34.3                   46.4
            3 or more                      11.3                34.1                   32.8
         Women by Age of
         Youngest Child:
            Less than 3 months             11.6                35.3                   32.8
            3 to 6 months                  15.2                34.6                   43.8
            6 to 9 months                  16.4                34.6                   47.6
            9 to 12 months                 17.0                34.6                   48.9
            1 to 5 years                   20.4                35.8                   56.7
            5 to 6 years                   24.5                37.4                   65.5



all non-employment spells do not involve the birth of a child (almost 82%) and the average

duration of these spells is similar to that of men (44 weeks). The main difference in the

duration of non-employment spells between men and women is in the spells of women that

involve the birth of a child (104 weeks vs. 41 weeks for men).8 These gender differences in

the duration of non-employment spells translate into differences in accumulated experience

(see Table 4). Men and women with no children accumulate about the same amount of

experience, however, women with children accumulate much less experience than men, 24%

in weeks and 48% in hours.

   8
    The NLSY79 provides the necessary information to characterize labor market decisions of women around
the birth of a child (6 weeks or less either before or after birth). For employed mothers around the birth of
a child, 57% remain employed, 21% return to work within a quarter, 12% return to work after a year, and
3% never return to work.




                                                     16
Marriage or Children? While many authors have emphasized the importance of mar-

riage for understanding female labor supply, our reading of the data is that the primary

factor affecting labor hours of women is children. The evidence already discussed in Table 5

points to the importance of the number and age of children for labor supply of women. To

assess the relative importance of children and marriage in understanding gender differences

in labor supply, we report in Table 6 the accumulated weekly hours of experience by gender,

marital history, and children for people of age 35 or 36. The table shows that when we focus

on women without children, the difference in accumulated years of experience between men

and women is not affected by whether women have ever been married or not. Children do

have an important impact on labor supply of women: While childless women accumulate

about 10% less hours of experience than men (regardless of marital status), women who had

a child before age 36 accumulate about 30% less hours of experience than men. When we

consider women with children, marriage is associated with higher (not lower) labor supply

relative to men. In our sample, never married women with children have the lowest accu-

mulated experience relative to men. Mincer and Polachek (1974) report similar observations

for an older cohort of men and women in the U.S.: The average number of years of non-

participation since school is 10.4 and 3.3 for white married women with and without children,

respectively.




                                             17
                Table 6: Accumulated Experience − Marriage vs. Children

                                                            Hours
                                                         Years Ratio
                          Men                            16.3   1.00
                          Women “No Children”:
                           -Ever married                  14.5     0.89
                           -Never married                 14.4     0.88
                          Women “Had Children”:
                           -Ever married                  11.0     0.68
                           -Never married                  8.8     0.54

                        People 35 or 36 years of age. Experience is weekly
                        hours of work converted into years by dividing for
                        52 weeks and 40 hors per week. “No children” refers
                        to women that at the specified age has not had a
                        child and “Never married” refers to women who at
                        the specified age has never been married.



3    Economic Environment

We consider a life-cycle economy populated by male and female workers. In each period

people decide whether to work or stay at home and, if they work, they choose an amount

of effort in accumulating human capital. Females also make fertility decisions. To keep

our analysis simple, we abstract from marriage, inter-temporal consumption smoothing, and

general equilibrium interactions. Below we present the key ingredients of our framework.


Life-Cycle People enter the labor market at age 20 and may decide to work up to age 65.

We emphasize that modeling a finite lifetime allow us to capture the life-cycle aspect of fer-

tility and human capital accumulation decisions. Our model generates life-cycle observations

for employment and wages that can be compared with data.




                                                18
Labor Decision We model the labor participation decision by assuming that people draw

a stochastic value of staying at home, which could be correlated over time and vary with

age and, in the case of females, with the number of children. People decide whether to

work a fixed amount of hours (that depends on the age, gender, and number of children of

that person) or not to work. In making the employment decision, people face the following

trade-off: If they work, they earn labor earnings, which enter linearly in their utility function

but they do not enjoy the entire utility of staying at home. The trade-off also has a dynamic

component since we assume that human capital is accumulated while working.


Human Capital Accumulation Decision We model human capital accumulation while

working. We assume that workers who exert effort e increase their human capital by a

proportion 4 with probability e. The utility cost of effort is given by c(j, h) log(1 − e),

where c(j, h) is a function of the age and human capital of the person. Roughly speaking,

the parameter values describing the utility cost of effort c(j, h) are selected to match age and

experience profile of wages for people at different points of the wage distribution. Studies in

the psychology literature point that the ability to learn decreases with age, suggesting that

the cost of accumulating human capital increases with age.9 We also allow for the possibility

that spending time at home is more valuable for high human capital people. Finally, we

assume that the wage rate is proportional to human capital.


Fertility Decision We assume that females derive utility from children and from spending

time with them at home. Therefore, children can have a negative impact on the employment

  9
      See for instance Avolio and Waldman (1994) and Skirbekk (2003).



                                                   19
decision of females. In addition, we assume that children reduce the hours of work of females

by an exogenous amount per child. We assume that females need a fertility opportunity

in order to consider the decision of having a newborn child. Fertility opportunities arise

stochastically over time and their likelihood varies with age and the number of children.

We introduce fertility opportunities in the model in order to capture time frictions such as

finding a partner and biological constraints.


Timing of Decisions Below, we draw a time line representing the timing of decisions

within a period in our model. People start an age-j period with a state given by the value

of staying at home v and an amount of human capital h. In addition, females start the

period with a given number of children n and a fertility shock. In a first stage, females who

have a fertility opportunity decide whether to give birth or not. Males and females without

fertility opportunities do not take any decisions in this stage. In a second stage, people decide

whether to work a fixed amount of hours (that depends on the age, gender, and number of

children of the person) or not to work. In a third stage, working individuals decide how much

effort to exert in accumulating human capital. People who do not work during the current

period enjoy the value of staying at home. At the end of the period, individuals make a new

draw for the value of staying at home (which is assumed to be correlated over time).




                                                20
 Human capital h
  Home value v
 No. of Children n

      (h, v, n) Fertility                                             (h0 , v 0 , n0 )
                 shock
        ¾                                                                        -
      Age j                                                           Age j + 1
                      Labor Decision             HCA Decision



                Fertility Decision

    We formalize the decision problem of a female using the language of dynamic program-

ming. The decision problem of a male is similar but without the fertility stage. An age-j

female starts the period with a state given by human capital h, number of children n, and

home value v. She then faces a fertility opportunity with probability θj (n). Her value func-

tion, prior to the realization of the fertility opportunity, is represented by B j (h, n, v) and

satisfies,


                                    n                             o
        B j (h, n, v) = θj (n) max V j (h, n + 1, v), V j (h, n, v) + (1 − θj (n))V j (h, n, v),



where the max operator represents the fertility decision and V j denotes the value function

of a female after the fertility stage. The labor market decision is represented as follows:


                                                n                            o
                            V j (h, n, v) = max W j (h, n, v), H j (h, n, v) ,



where W denotes the value of working and H the value of staying at home. W j is given by,



   W j (h, n, v) = hl(j, n) + (1 − l(j, n))u(h, v) + γn log(1 + n)



                                                    21
                                 n                                                                           o
                    + max c(j, h) log(1 − e) + eV̂ i (h(1 + 4), n, v) + (1 − e)V̂ i (h, n, v) ,
                       e∈[0,1]




where l(j, n) denotes the fraction of hours worked by a female of age j and n children, hl(j, n)

represents labor earnings, u(h, v) is the value of staying at home which is allowed to depend

on human capital and the value of staying at home v, and γn is a parameter determining taste

for children for females. If the worker exerts effort e, at a utility cost of c(j, h) log(1 − e),

the worker increases human capital to h(1 + 4) with probability e. The function V̂ j is

the expected discounted value of a female prior to the realization of the value of staying at

home next period. This value evolves over time according to a transition function Qj (which

depends on the age of the worker),


                                                 Z
                          V̂ j (h0 , n, v) = β        B j+1 (h0 , n, v 0 )Qj (dv 0 , v).
                                                 v0




The value of not working H is given by,


                                                                   Z
               j
             H (h, n, v) = u(h, v) + γn log(1 + n) + β                    B j+1 (h, n, v 0 )Qj (dv 0 , v).
                                                                     v0




People who do not work enjoy the entire value of staying at home u(h, v). We assume that

human capital does not depreciate when not working.




                                                       22
4     Calibration

Our calibration strategy is as follows. We calibrate the model to panel data of men, in

particular, we target the employment ratio and hours of work by age, the accumulation of

experience, the duration distribution of non-employment spells, and the growth in wages over

the life cycle. We emphasize that heterogeneity and life-cycle profiles in wages are important

for parameter values related to human capital accumulation. For females, we only calibrate

to targets that relate to the number of children and to the employment and hours histories

of women after childbirth. The mapping between parameter values and targets in the data

is multidimensional and we thus solve for parameter values jointly. For expositional reasons,

we next describe the role of each parameter on a specific target as if the parameter has a

first-order impact in the target.



4.1    Calibration of Males

Some parameters are selected without solving the model. We set the model period to be a

quarter and β = 0.99. Hours per worker for males, l(j), 20 to 40 years of age are obtained

from NLSY79 and for men 41 to 64 years of age, hours are obtained from CPS data. Since

investment in human capital in our theory is determined by future (life-cycle) labor supply,

we emphasize the importance of obtaining reasonable age profile of hours of work and em-

ployment. Another set of parameter values are selected to match certain targets in the data

by solving the model. We describe this procedure in detail below. We present a summary

of parameters and targets in Table 7.




                                             23
Value of Staying at Home We assume that the value of staying at home for a worker with

human capital h and home shock v is given by u(h, v) = hv. We assume that v = vj vs , where

vj represents a deterministic life-cycle value of staying at home and vs denotes a stochastic

shock to the value of staying at home. The life-cycle term vj is used to generate a plausible

age profile of employment. We search for 9 values of vj in order to match the employment

rate of men at 9 selected ages (the values of vj for other ages are linearly interpolated). The

stochastic component vs is used to generate flows in and out of employment. We assume

that vs follows a first order autoregressive process: vs0 = ρvs + εv , where εv ∼ N (0, σv2 ). The

parameters (ρ, σv ) are selected in order to match the duration distribution of non-employment

spells and the mean years of job market experience of male workers at age 40.


Human Capital We assume that individuals enter the labor market at age 20 and that

they make a draw of their initial human capital from a log-normal distribution. The mean of

log human capital is normalized to 2 (the lowest log human capital is normalized to 0) and

the standard deviation, σh20 , is chosen so that the coefficient of variation of wages for male

workers at age 20 matches the 0.36 value in the NLSY79 data. For computational tractability

we approximate the continuous log-normal distribution with a discrete distribution over 200

grid points. We assume that the disutility of effort varies with age and human capital

according to the function c(j, h) = α(j)hγh where α(j) = α1 + j α2 and γh > 0. The

technology for accumulating human capital is then described by the growth rate 4, γh , and

the parameters (α1 , α2 ). These parameters are selected in order to obtain age profile of wages

for two groups of workers in the data. In particular, we focus on the average wage for people



                                               24
in the bottom and top 50% of the distribution of wages at each age.

                                    Table 7: Calibration for Males

                       Parameter            Target
                       vj                   Employment by age
                       ρ                    Duration of non-employment spells
                       σ²s                  Average experience at age 40
                       σh20                 C.V. wage at age 20
                       (α1 , α2 , ∆, γh )   Wage-age profiles
                                            for high and low wage people




Summarizing We divide the set of calibrated parameters in two groups. The first group

consists of those parameters that can be selected without solving the model. They include

the time-discount rate and the profile of working hours by age. The second group consists of

16 parameters whose calibration requires solving the model. They are given by 9 parameters

describing deterministic home values by age (vj ), 2 parameters describing the stochastic home

values (ρ, σ² ), 4 parameters describing human capital accumulation (4, α1 , α2 , γh ), and one

parameter for the initial distribution of human capital σh20 . We proceed by minimizing a loss

function that adds the square deviations between the values of the statistics in the model and

the values of the target statistics in the data. A summary of the parameter values obtained

is shown in Table 9.



4.2    Calibration for Females

Preference for Children and Fertility Opportunities We select the preference pa-

rameter for the number of children γn to match the total fertility rate in the NLSY79 data.



                                                   25
We assume that fertility opportunities are constant within the age groups 20-24, 25-29, 30-34,

and 35-40 but differ by number of children (0, 1, 2, and 3 or more). We parameterize fertility

opportunities with 7 parameters: 4 parameters describing fertility opportunities for the first

child and 3 parameters scaling fertility opportunities by age conditional on having one, two,

and three or more children. These parameters are chosen to match birth rates by age and

the distribution of females at age 40 by number of children. A summary of the parameters

and the targets in the data is reported in Table 8 and a summary of the parameter values

in the calibration is shown in Table 9.


Value of Staying at Home In order to model the impact of children on female employ-

ment and career interruptions, we assume that females derive utility from spending time at

home with children. The value of staying at home for females is given by v = vj (vs +vc ). The

term vj represents a life-cycle (deterministic) value and vs is a stochastic value of staying at

home as described in the calibration for males. The term vc is a stochastic value of spending

time at home with children. We assume that females can enjoy vc when giving birth or

during a child-related spell of non-employment. In other words, working females that have

not given birth in the current period cannot quit their jobs to enjoy vc . For computational

simplicity, we assume that vc is drawn from an exponential distribution with mean µvc . The

parameter µvc is selected to match the employment ratio of women by the age of the youngest

child.


Hours of Work and Human Capital We assume that the age profile of working hours

for females is the same as the one for males but for the fact that females work in average


                                              26
10% less hours than males (at every age) and that in average each child reduces the hours

of work by 4% until age 40. These assumptions are motivated by our observations from the

NLSY79 data discussed in Section 2. We assume that females face the same technology for

accumulating human capital as males. We assume, however, that the distribution of human

capital of females at age 20 is shifted to the left by an exogenous amount relative to the

distribution of males. This assumption is motivated by the fact that in the NLSY79 data,

the wages of women of age 20 are in average 18% lower than those of men of age 20. Since

we do not model human capital decisions prior to age 20, our theory is not built to account

for this initial gender difference in wages. We conjecture that part of this initial gap in wages

is due to the same forces that we emphasize in our theory: Women expect to have children

in the future and, thus, to work less hours than males. As a result, females invest less in

market human capital not only after age 20, as emphasized in our theory, but also prior to

age 20.

                               Table 8: Calibration for Females

                       Parameter Target
                       θj (n)    Distribution of number of children
                       γn        Total fertility rate
                       µvc       Employment of mothers
                                 by age of youngest child




Summarizing We select the values of 9 parameters: 7 parameters describing fertility op-

portunities θj (n) at selected age groups and by number of children, the preference parameter

for children γn , and the parameter describing the distribution for the value of staying at home

with children µvc . As discussed for the case of the calibration of males, we proceed by min-


                                               27
imizing a loss function constructed by adding the squared deviations between the statistics

in the model with the corresponding target statistics in the data.

                                Table 9: Parameter Values

                       Parameter Value Parameter             Value
                          v20     2.40      4                 3%
                          v25     0.41      α1                0.35
                          v30     0.36      α2                0.35
                          v40     0.24  θ20−24 (0)          0.0231
                          v45     0.23  θ25−29 (0)          0.0236
                          v50     0.30  θ30−34 (0)          0.0189
                          v55     0.37  θ35−40 (0)          0.0113
                          v60     0.50    θj (1)          j
                                                         θ (0) ∗ 2.30
                          v65     1.00    θj (2)         θj (0) ∗ 0.85
                           ρ      0.76   θj (3+)         θj (0) ∗ 0.60
                           σ²     0.79     µv c                3.2
                          σh20    0.33      γn                 1.0
                           γh     0.78




4.3    Calibration Results

In what follows we describe the results of the model regarding the calibration targets dis-

cussed in the previous two subsections. Figure 5 reports the employment ratio by age for

the model and the data. The model matches well the life-cycle path for male employment

in the data. Together with the exogenous hours per worker, the life-cycle employment gen-

erates a stock of accumulated experience that compares well with the data. At age 40, the

model implies 16.4 years of accumulated experience while the same statistic in the data is

16.8 years. This average experience is generated from a reasonable distribution of years of

experience in the model relative to the data (see Table 10).

   Figures 6 and 7 document the age and experience profile of wages for the model and


                                             28
    Table 10: Distribution of Accumulated Experience between age 20 and 40 - Males

                                                   Data   Model
                              Average (years)      16.8    16.4
                              Distribution (%):
                                < 15 years          18       14
                                [15, 17) years      17       31
                                [17, 19) years      33       39
                                [19, 21) years      32       15



the data for the average of people in the bottom 50% and in the top 50% of the age and

experience distribution of wages. The model captures well the heterogeneity and the life-

cycle pattern in average wage profiles for these two distinct groups of people. Moreover, the

model also captures well the heterogeneity in wage growth by age at different points of the

wage distribution for males (see Figure 8). Another target in our calibration procedure is

the duration distribution of non-employment spells for men. Table 11 reports the duration

distribution of these spells in the model and in the data.

              Table 11: Duration Distribution of Non-employment Spells (%)

                                                      Males
                          Duration (weeks):       Data Model
                          1 quarter (7-19)         48      46
                          2 quarters (20-32)       18      20
                          3 quarters (33-45)       12      12
                          4 quarters (46-58)        6       7
                          More than a year (> 58)  16      15



   Regarding the statistics of our calibration targets for women with children, Table 12

reports the total fertility rate, birth rates by age, and the distribution of number of children

for females at age 40. The average fertility rate is 1.84 children per female in the model


                                              29
and 1.81 in the data. The model also matches the birth rates by age and the distribution of

women at age 40 by number of children: About 20% of females do not have children, 50%

have one or two children, and 30% have 3 or more children.

Table 12: Fertility Rate, Birth Rates by Age, and Distribution of Females at Age 40 by
Number of Children

                                                           Data Model
                        Average Fertility                  1.81  1.84
                        Birth Rates: (%)
                          20-24                            0.33    0.30
                          25-29                            0.34    0.32
                          30-34                            0.23    0.23
                          35-40                            0.10    0.15
                        Female Distribution by
                        Number of Children: (%)
                          0                                19.0    20.0
                          1                                17.3    13.5
                          2                                35.8    36.7
                          3                                18.2    22.2
                          ≥4                                9.7    7.6



   Table 13 reports the employment to population ratio of females by age of the youngest

child in the model compared with the data. The model matches well the pattern of low

employment for females with young children.

            Table 13: Employment Ratio of Mothers by Age of Youngest Child

                                                Data       Model
                              Age of Child:
                                1 quarter           32.8    33.5
                                2 quarter           43.8    44.4
                                3 quarter           47.6    50.2
                                4 quarter           48.9    54.2
                                [1, 5) years        56.7    70.2
                                [5, 6) years        65.5    82.3



                                               30
    Table 14 documents the duration distribution of child related non-employment spells in

the model and in the data. The model implies slightly longer duration spells than in the

data.

         Table 14: Duration Distribution of Non-employment Spells of Mothers (%)

                         Duration (weeks):       Data       Model
                         1 quarter (7-19)         20         18
                         2 quarters (20-32)       10         10
                         3 quarters (33-45)        9          8
                         4 quarters (46-58)        7          6
                         More than a year (> 58)  54         58




5       Quantitative Analysis

In this section, we use our theory to measure human capital investment by females. Although

we assume that females face the same human capital technology as males, there are three

channels leading to gender differences in the returns to human capital investment. First,

females expect to give birth to children which, in turn, negatively affects females’ expected

employment and working hours (young working mothers − 40 years old or less − work

4% less hours per child). Second, females work 10% less hours than males when employed

(exogenous hour gap), regardless of whether they have children or not, as motivated by our

discussion of the data in Section 2. Third, females at age 20 enter the labor market with

a human capital that is 16% lower than the one of males (the gender gap in initial human

capital is calibrated so that the model reproduces a gender gap in wages at age 20 of 18%,

as documented in the NLSY79 data). As a result, our theory implies gender differences in


                                             31
human capital investments. The important question is whether our theory quantitatively

accounts for the substantial gender differences in life-cycle wage growth documented in the

NLSY data. Below, we argue that the answer to this question is yes.


Female Labor Supply As discussed in the calibration section, the model is calibrated to

panel data of men and only to data of women that relates directly to the number of children

and to the impact of children on women’s employment and hours of work after childbirth.

We emphasize that our calibration does not target the gender differences in labor supply.

Table 15 reports the employment ratio of females for different ages in the model and in

the data. Since the model implies higher female employment than in the data (specially

among women older than 30 years), our findings suggest that there may be other factors,

different from children, leading to the low employment rate of women relative to men (such

as, household specialization). In addition, the model implies a slightly shorter duration of

the non-employment spells of females relative to the data (see Table 16). Overall, the model

generates large gender differences in labor supply, albeit smaller than in the data. In effect,

by age 40, the gender difference in total hours of work in our model is about 31%, while this

statistic is 48% in the data.

                       Table 15: Employment Ratio by Age - Females

                                     Age Data      Model
                                     20  0.59       0.62
                                     25  0.68       0.68
                                     30  0.69       0.78
                                     40  0.77       0.87




                                              32
             Table 16: Duration Distribution of Non-employment Spells† (%)

                                                    Females
                         Duration (weeks):       Data Model
                         1 quarter (7-19)         38     42
                         2 quarters (20-32)       17     19
                         3 quarters (33-45)       12     11
                         4 quarters (46-58)        7      7
                         More than a year (> 58)  26     20
                                   †
                                       Between ages 20 and 40.



      Table 17: Average Accumulated Experience between ages 20 and 40 (in years)

                                                        Hours
                                                     Data Model
                               Males                 19.2  19.0
                               Females               13.0  14.7
                               Males/Females         1.48  1.31



Wages of Females in the Life Cycle Our model of human capital investments can

account for the low life-cycle wage growth of females relative to males. In fact, if anything,

we find that the wages of females grow with age slightly less in our model than in the data.

While in the data the wages of females grow between ages 20 to 40 by a factor of 1.75, in

the model they grow by a factor of 1.65. Our theory also has implications for the cross-

sectional distribution of wages along the life-cycle. We find that our model does a good job

in accounting for the slow wage growth for female workers at the bottom 75% of the wage

distribution (see Figure 9). The main disparity between the model and the data is that

the model implies much slower wage growth for female workers at the top 10% of the wage

distribution relative to the data. In Table 18, we show that the life cycle wage growth for

the bottom 50% of the wage distribution is given by a factor of 1.40 in the data and by a


                                                33
factor of 1.36 in the model. Regarding the top 50% of the wage distribution, the life cycle

wage growth is about a factor of 1.98 in the data and a factor of 1.82 in the model. Overall,

we conclude that our theory can account well for the slow life cycle wage growth of females

across the wage distribution.

                         Table 18: Wage Growth (Age 40/Age 20)

                                          Males           Females
                                       Data Model      Data Model
                        Average        2.11   2.19     1.75   1.65
                        Top 50%        2.33   2.44     1.98   1.82
                        Bottom 50%     1.72   1.74     1.40   1.36




The Gender Gap in Wages We now turn to the implications of the model for the gender

gap in wages. Recall that the model is calibrated to match the gender gap in wages at age

20 of 0.18. We find that by age 40 the gender wage gap has increased to 0.39, which implies

an increase of 21 percentage points in the gender gap in wages between age 20 and age 40.

The increase in the gender wage gap reveals that females spend less effort in accumulating

human capital than males. As previously discussed, children, the exogenous differences in

hours of work, and the initial differences in human capital are the three channels generating

gender differences in the returns to human capital investments in our model. In order to

evaluate the quantitative importance of each of these channels, we consider an economy with

identical males and females and perform three experiments in which we add one channel at a

time until we obtain our benchmark economy. In a first experiment, we assume that females

only differ with respect to males in that females give birth to children, which negatively



                                             34
affects their expected labor hours (we refer to this experiment as “only children”). In this

economy, children have a negative impact on expected labor supply since mothers are less

likely to work and, when employed, work 4% less hours per child than non-mothers. We

find that the gender wage gap increases from 0 to 0.08 between ages 20 to 40. Thus, about

40% of the increase in the gender wage gap between ages 20 to 40 (0.08 out of an increase of

0.21) is due to the impact of children on the labor supply of females. The second experiment

evaluates, in addition to the impact of children, the consequences of an exogenous reduction

in hours of work of 10% for all females. We find that the increase in the gender wage gap

between age 20 and age 40 is now 17 percentage points. Since in the first experiment we

find that children lead to an increase of 8 percentage points in the gender gap, we conclude

that adding the exogenous differences in hours of work further increases the gender wage

gap at age 40 in 9 percentage points. The last experiment incorporates all three channels

(children, the gender differences in hours worked and, the gender differences in initial human

capital), which corresponds to our benchmark economy. Table 19 summarizes the findings of

these experiments. We conclude that the impact of children on the labor supply of mothers

contributes around 40% to the increase in the gender gap in wages during the life cycle,

exogenous gender differences in hours of work contributes another 40% to the increase in

the gender gap in wages, while exogenous differences in initial human capital contributes the

remaining 20%.

   We emphasize that the contribution of children to the increase in the gender gap in wages

during the life cycle represents in some sense a lower bound of the overall impact of children

on gender differences in wages. The reason is that both the exogenous differences in initial


                                             35
                              Table 19: Gender Gap in Wages

              Benchmark Model:
                Age 20                             0.18
                Age 40                             0.39
                440−20                             0.21
                                                  440−20   Contribution (%)
              Counterfactuals:
                Only Children                      0.08        0.08        38
                + Exo. Hours                       0.17        0.09        43
                + Exo. Initial Human Capital       0.21        0.04        19



human capital and hours of work between males and females in our model can be in part

attributed to the impact of children on employment and hours: The same forces that imply

a low employment and hours of females with young children in our model would also induce

females to supply less hours of work and less effort in accumulating human capital before

age 20.


Connection to Empirical Literature Our theory emphasizes the importance of future

labor supply as opposed to actual experience for human capital accumulation. Our findings

are consistent with the vast empirical literature that finds a substantial gender residual in

wage regressions that measure human capital investments by past experience. To illustrate

this point, we simulate males and females in our model that are identical in terms of initial

human capital and lifetime employment. Our simulated males and females only differ in

lifetime labor supply because females work 10% less hours than males and because females

expect to have children −with the associated negative impact on labor supply− even though

ex-post no female is ever given an opportunity to have children. As a result, we simulate




                                             36
females that are identical to males at age 20 and have identical age-profile of employment

over the life cycle. Since females in this experiment work more than 35 hours a week, we

follow the empirical literature in counting them as full-time employed. Hence, the data

generated by this experiment features no gender differences in experience as measured by

full-time employment. The gender wage ratio in this experiment is exactly 1 at age 20

and despite no differences in lifetime full-time employment, at age 40, we nevertheless find

a gender wage ratio of 0.91: females earn on average a wage that is 9 percentage points

lower relative to the average wage of males. Using this simulated data, a standard wage

regression of log wages on experience (measured as full-time employment) and a sex dummy

as explanatory variables, would attribute a negative wage effect to being a female worker

and a lower return to (measured) experience by females relative to males. This experiment

reveals that even females that are highly attached to the labor market, face weaker incentives

to invest in human capital than males that can generate sizeable gender wage gaps. Young

females spend less effort in accumulating human capital than experience-equivalent males

because they anticipate working less hours (even if employed full time). We conclude that,

in the context of our model, standard measures of experience typically used in the empirical

literature are not good measures of investment in human capital over the life cycle.


The Family Gap in Wages Waldfogel (1998) and others have documented a “family

gap” in wages, which is calculated as one minus the average wage ratio between women with

children and women without children at a given age. The family ratio in wages in our model

for females 35 to 40 years of age is 0.902. That is, we find a family wage gap of around



                                             37
5% per child which is quantitatively consistent with the estimates reported in the empirical

literature and with our own calculations using the NLSY79 data. Whereas the literature has

attributed this gap to the loss of specific human capital and good job quality matches, in

our model the family wage gap arises because career interruptions due to childbirth occur

at a stage of the life cycle where the return to human capital investment is relatively high.


Discussion The increase in the gender gap in wages between age 20 and age 40 is 21

percentage points in our model, while it is about 14 percentage points in the data. We can

think of two possible reasons for this outcome. First, our model assumes that males and

females are equally productive at accumulating human capital. Given that the employment

rate of women is much lower than that of men, it could well be the case that working women

in the data are of higher ability than men, as suggested by some recent evidence from test

scores in higher education. A second reason that could explain the slow life-cycle wage

growth of females in our model relative to the data is that our theory abstracts from time

trends in prices that could have favored relatively more women than men. In fact, Bacolod

and Blum (2005) present evidence that in the U.S. economy during the 1968-1990 period the

price of cognitive skills has increased while the price of motor skills has decreased. Moreover,

they argue that changes in the price of skills have played an important role in the reduction

of the gender wage gap during recent decades. Obviously, our results would have shown

higher life cycle wage growth of females had we modeled changes in prices that favor females

relative to males. Interestingly, the price changes documented by Bacolod and Blum (2005)

are likely to benefit more strongly women at the top of the wage distribution than at the



                                              38
bottom since women at the top of the wage distribution are likely endowed with relatively

higher levels of cognitive skills.




6     Conclusions

We develop a quantitative life-cycle theory of fertility, labor supply, and human capital

accumulation decisions that is successful in generating the observed employment ratio, hours

of work, duration of non-employment spells, and accumulated experience at age 40 for males.

In addition, our model is successful in generating an average fertility rate, birth rates by age,

and the impact of children on career interruptions and the labor supply of females as observed

in the NLSY data. In our model, fertility implies lower lifetime labor supply, lower returns

to investment in human capital, and lower wage growth of females over the life cycle relative

to males. We find that fertility accounts for most of the gender differences in labor supply

and wages over the life cycle. In addition, the model generates a gender gap in wages across

people at different points of the wage distribution as observed in the data.

    Our quantitative theory can also be used to study the gender gap in wages within educa-

tion and racial groups. For instance, Polachek (2004) documents that the gender difference

in labor hours is smaller among blacks than whites and that the gender gap in wages appears

smaller for blacks than for whites. This evidence is suggestive of the role of human capital

accumulation. Our model can also be used to address the substantial decline in the gender

gap over the last 20 years in the U.S. data (see Blau and Khan, 1997). Our theory suggests

that the factors responsible for the substantial increase in labor hours of women during this




                                               39
period such as the fall in fertility, the increase in part-time work, the availability of child care

services, the reallocation of labor within the household, among others; may be important in

accounting for the convergence in wages across genders over time. We leave these important

research questions for future work.




                                                40
References
 [1] Aiyagari, S. R., Greenwood, J., and Guner, N. (2000). “The State of the Union”. Journal
    of Political Economy 108(2), 213-44.

 [2] Anderson, D., Melissa B., and Krause, K. (2002). “The Motherhood Wage Penalty:
    Which Mothers Pay It and Why?” American Economic Review, 92(2), May, 354-58.

 [3] Attanasio, O., Low, H., and Sánchez-Marcos, V. (2004). “Explaining Changes in Female
    Labour Supply in a Life-cycle Model.” Manuscript. University College London.

 [4] Avolio, B. J. and Waldman, D. A. (1994). “Variations in Cognitive, Perceptual, and
    Psychomotor Abilities across the Working Life Span: Examining the Effects of Race,
    Sex, Experience, Education, and Occupational Type”. Psychology and Aging, 9(3): 430-
    442.

 [5] Bacolod, M. and Blum, B. (2005). “Two Sides of the Same Coin: U.S. ”Residual”
    Inequality and the Gender Gap.” Manuscript. University of Toronto.

 [6] Becker, G. (1967). “Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income: An Ana-
    lytical Approach.” Manuscript. Woytinsky Lecture. University of Michigan.

 [7] Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earn-
    ings.” Journal of Political Economy 75 (4, Part 1): 352-65.

 [8] Blau, F. and Kahn, L. (1997). “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
    Differential in the 1980’s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15, 1-42.

 [9] Blau, F. and Kahn, L. (2000). “Gender differences in Pay.” Journal of Economic Per-
    spectives 14, 75-99.

[10] Bowlus, A. (1997). “A Search Interpretation of Male-Female Wage Differentials.” Jour-
    nal of Labor Economics 15, 625-57.




                                            41
[11] Da Rocha, J.M. and Fuster, L. (2004). “Why Are Fertility Rates and Female Employ-
    ment Ratios Positively Correlated across O.E.C.D. Countries?” Forthcoming in Inter-
    national Economic Review.

[12] Erosa, A., Fuster, L., and Restuccia, D. (2001). “A General Equilibrium Analysis of
    Parental Leave Policies.” Manuscript, University of Toronto.

[13] Erosa, A., Fuster, L., and Restuccia, D. (2002). “Fertility Decisions and Gender Dif-
    ferences in Labor Turover, Employment, and Wages.” Review of Economic Dynamics
    5(4): 1354-78.

[14] Greenwood, J., Seshardi, A., and Yorukoglu, M. (2005). “Engines of Liberation.” Review
    of Economic Studies 72: 109-33.

[15] Huggett, M., Ventura, G., and Yaron, A. (2004). “Human Capital and Earnings Distri-
    bution Dynamics.” Forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics.

[16] Imai, S. and Keane, M. (2004). “Intertemporal Labor Supply and Human Capital Ac-
    cumulation.” International Economic Review 45(2): 601-42.

[17] Jones, L., Manuelli, R., and McGrattan, E. (2003). “Why Are Marrierd Women Working
    so Much?” Staff Report 317, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

[18] Killingsworth, M. and Heckman, J. (1999). “Female Labor Supply: A Survey” in Orley
    Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Chapter 2, Vol. 1,
    Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[19] Mincer, J. and Polachek, S. (1974). “Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings
    of Women.” Journal of Political Economy 82: S76-S108.

[20] Olivetti, C. (2001). “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Effect of Chang-
    ing Returns to Experience.” Manuscript. Boston University.

[21] O’Neill, J. (2003). “The Gender Gap in Wages, circa 2000.” American Economic Review
    Papers and Proceedings 93(2): 309-25.


                                            42
[22] Polachek, S. (2004). “How the Human Capital Model Explains Why the Gender Wage
    Gap Narrowed.” Discussion Paper No. 1102, IZA.

[23] Regalia, F. and Rı́os-Rull, J.V. (1998). “What Accounts for the Increase in the Number
    of Single Households”. Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

[24] Skirbekk, V. (2003). “Age and Individual Productivity: A Literature Survey”. Max-
    Planck Institute for Demographic Research.

[25] Waldfogel, J. (1998). “Understanding the ”Family Gap” in Pay for Women with Chil-
    dren”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 137-56.

[26] Wood, R., Corcoran, M., and Courant, P. (1993). “Pay Differences among the Highly
    Paid: The Male-Female Earnings Gap in Lawyers’ Salaries”. Journal of Labor Eco-
    nomics 11, 417-41.




                                            43
                              Figure 1: Average Hourly Wage by Age

2.2
              Men
              Women

 2




1.8




1.6




1.4




1.2




 1




0.8
   20        22        24        26        28           30   32   34   36   38   40
                                                       Age

      Relative to the average wage of men at age 20.




                                                       44
                                Figure 2: Gender Wage Ratio by Age



0.86


0.84


0.82


 0.8


0.78


0.76


0.74


0.72


 0.7


0.68
    20         22        24        26       28        30      32   34   36   38   40
                                                     Age

       Average wage of women relative to males at each age.




                                                    45
                                Figure 3: Employment to Population Ratio

          0.95
                     Men
                     Women
                     Women NoKever
           0.9



          0.85



           0.8
Average




          0.75



           0.7



          0.65



           0.6



          0.55
              20     22        24       26       28          30     32       34        36       38         40
                                                            Age

          Women NoKever refers to women with no children (until the last observation in our sample, when
          women are between 36 to 43 years of age).




                                                       46
                                   Figure 4: Hours Per-worker (per-week)

          50
                   Men
                   Women
                   Women NoKever
          48



          46



          44
Average




          42



          40



          38



          36



          34
            20      22        24       26       28        30       32        34       36        38         40
                                                         Age

          Women NoKever refers to women with no children (until the last observation in our sample, when
          women are between 36 to 43 years of age).




                                                       47
                                             Figure 5: Employment Ratio by Age - Males

                                  1
                                                                                                   Data
                                                                                                   Model
                                 0.9


                                 0.8


                                 0.7
Employment to Population Ratio




                                 0.6


                                 0.5


                                 0.4


                                 0.3


                                 0.2


                                 0.1


                                  0
                                   20   25   30       35      40         45    50        55   60           65
                                                                   Age




                                                                48
                                              Figure 6: Age Profile of Wages - Males

                          5
                                Data Top 50
                                Data Bottom 50
                         4.5    Model Top 50
                                Model Bottom 50

                          4


                         3.5
Relative to bottom 50%




                          3


                         2.5


                          2


                         1.5


                          1


                         0.5


                          0
                           20   22       24       26      28      30      32      34   36   38   40
                                                                 Age




                                                               49
                                            Figure 7: Experience Profile of Wages - Males

                          5
                                   Data Top 50
                                   Data Bottom 50
                         4.5       Model Top 50
                                   Model Bottom 50

                          4


                         3.5
Relative to bottom 50%




                          3


                         2.5


                          2


                         1.5


                          1


                         0.5


                          0
                               2              4          6          8           10          12   14
                                                                Experience




                                                                 50
                                 Figure 8: Age Profile of Wages - Males

                        Data                                                         Model
 5                                                              5


4.5                                                           4.5


 4                                                              4


3.5                                                           3.5


 3                                                              3


2.5                                                           2.5


 2                                                              2


1.5                                                           1.5


 1                                                              1


0.5                                                           0.5


 0                                                              0
  20          25          30         35         40               20         25         30         35           40
                         Age                                                          Age

      The lines correspond to the following percentiles of the distribution of wages: 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, 90,
      and 95. Relative to the median wage of males at age 20.




                                                       51
                               Figure 9: Age Profile of Wages - Females

                        Data                                                         Model
 5                                                              5


4.5                                                           4.5


 4                                                              4


3.5                                                           3.5


 3                                                              3


2.5                                                           2.5


 2                                                              2


1.5                                                           1.5


 1                                                              1


0.5                                                           0.5


 0                                                              0
  20          25          30         35         40               20         25         30         35           40
                         Age                                                          Age

      The lines correspond to the following percentiles of the distribution of wages: 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, 90,
      and 95. Relative to the median wage of males at age 20.




                                                       52
